B o ok 2: The World of Glorantha

B o o k Tw o : T h e Wo r l d o f G l o r a n t h a
BY GREG STAFFORD, JEFF RICHARD, AND JASON DURALL
BASED ON MATERIALS BY IAN COOPER, STEVE PERRIN,
AND SANDY PETERSEN
EDITOR-IN-CHIEF: Jeff Richard
RUNEQUEST CREATIVE DIRECTOR: Jason Durall
COPYEDITING & PROOFREADING: Jaym Gates, Chris Harris, and Diana Probst
ART DIRECTION: Kalin Kadiev, Jaye Kovach, Aron Tarbuck, Jason Durall, and Jeff Richard
DESIGN & LAYOUT: Simeon Cogswell
ADDITIONAL DESIGN & LAYOUT: Rick Meints, Monika Godyń, and Malcolm Wolter
CARTOGRAPHY: Matt Ryan, Olivier Sanfilippo, and Tobias Tranell
BOX COVER ARTIST: Ossi Hiekkala
ADVENTURER ARTISTS: Jon Hodgson, Scott Purdy, Roman Kisyov, and Dimitrina Angelska
BOOK 2 COVER ARTIST: Hazem Ameen
ARTISTS: Dimitrina Angelska, William Church, Bernard Bittler, Katrin Dirim, Alberto Foche Duarte,
Rocío Espín, Andrey Fetisov, Ossi Hiekkala, Michelle Lockamy, Cory Trego-Erdner, and Chris Waller
EDITORIAL CONSULTING AND ADDITIONAL CONTRIBUTIONS: Michael O’Brien,
Nick Brooke, Jean-Christophe Cubertafon, Jonathan Geere, Martin Helsden, David Larkins, James Lowder,
Rick Meints, Diana Probst, Neil Robinson, David Scott, and Gianni Vacca
SPECIAL THANKS TO: Andrew Bean, Ian Cooper, Thomas Deeny, Christian Einsporn,
Daniel Fahey, Paul Fricker, Todd Gardiner, Sven Grottke, Lynne Hardy, Jon Hodgson, Kris Alice Hohls,
Adam Jury, Marysieńka Królowa, Chris Klug, Sebastian Körner, Michal Lisowski, Claudia Loroff,
Natalia Manam, Hal Mangold, Mike Mason, Anne Merrill, Nicholas Nicario, Daria Pilarczyk,
Mathew Pook, Christine Reich, Simon Taylor, John Wick, Adam Wieczorek, and Dustin Wright.
Our apologies to any others who are unrecorded.
This book is dedicated to the memory of Greg Stafford, architect, dreamer, and pioneer, without whom
none of us would be reading this, or playing games in Glorantha.

RUNEQUEST
A Chaosium Game
RuneQuest © copyright 1978–2021 Moon Design Publications LLC. All rights reserved.
RuneQuest: Roleplaying in Glorantha is published by Chaosium Inc.
Chaosium Inc. and the Chaosium logo are registered trademarks of Chaosium Inc.
RuneQuest and Glorantha are registered trademarks of Moon Design Publications LLC.
RuneQuest: Starter Set © copyright 2021 Moon Design Publications LLC. All rights reserved.
Chaosium Publication 4035
First Printing

This material is protected under the copyright laws
of the United States of America. Reproduction of
this work by any means without written permission
from the publisher, except for the use of short
excerpts for the purpose of reviews and the copying
of character sheets and handouts for in-game use, is
expressly prohibited.

Contents
Glorantha . . .......................................................................... 2
An Age of Bronze.................................................................. 2
T he Runes............................................................................. 4
Magic.................................................................................... 7
Gods and Cults .................................................................... 7
Unique Aspects of Glorantha .............................................. 12
T he World ........................................................................... 15
Dragon Pass.........................................................................16
Map of Northern Sartar........................................................... 18
Myth and Histor y . . .............................................................. 20
Jonstown............................................................................ 23
Histor y................................................................................. 23
Northern Sartar...................................................................25
Map of Tribes Around Jonstown . . ........................................... 26
Cit y Description.. ................................................................ 27
Map of Jonstown..................................................................... 28
Cit y Politics......................................................................... 31
Powerf ul People................................................................... 32
Cit y Quarters.......................................................................43
T he Upper Cit y . . .................................................................. 44
Map of Jonstown Upper City . . .................................................. 45
Scholars Quarter . . ............................................................... 47
Map of Jonstown Scholar’s Quarter........................................ 49
Map of Jonstown Merchant’s Quarter......................................50
Merchant’s Quarter . . ........................................................... 50
Map of Jonstown Crafter’s Quarter . . ........................................ 51
Crafter’s Quarter.................................................................52
T he People of Jonstown . . ..................................................... 53
Outside Jonstown................................................................57
Map of Jonstown Area . . ............................................................ 58

The World of

Glorantha
lorantha is a world made by the gods but shaped by
the deeds of mortals. Magic is part of everyday life,
and mythology is the basis of reality. Your adventurer
is a mortal, destined to die, but through luck, courage,
cunning, and sacrifice, can become a hero or even a god! Your
adventures might start gritty and realistic, and become fantastic
and mythic, only to return to gritty realism.
In Glorantha, people hold allegiance to tribe, city, and cult,
not to abstract alignments or ideologies. Although humanity
is the dominant species, their dominance is due only to the
quarrelling of the Elder Races—elves, dwarfs, trolls, and
others—who still rule large parts of the world.
Glorantha’s main theme is religion and the magical
relationship between humankind and the gods. The gods
and goddesses are real, and through their followers and cults
they play an important part in most major events. The Sky,
Earth, Air, Water, Darkness, and Moon have powerful deities
associated with them, as do powers such as Death, Fertility,
Movement, Stasis, Illusion, Truth, Disorder, and Harmony.
There are also countless lesser deities associated with things as
diverse as cats, cows, boats, vengeance, and volcanoes.
Glorantha is a complete universe. It is self-contained, and
from its myths to its motes it must be taken on its own terms.
It is filled with strange and distinct gods, cultures, and creatures
both familiar and fantastic, and players everywhere are enthralled
by the unique features of the setting.

A n Age of Bronz e
Glorantha is firmly set in the ancient world, or even prehistory.
It is for the most part a Bronze Age setting, characterized by:
the ubiquity of bronze, instead of iron, as the primary metal;
by writing as the preserve of a narrow professional elite (such
as the Lhankor Mhy cult); and by the flourishing of urban
civilizations (such as Nochet, Boldhome, and Furthest).

2

For Players and
Gamemasters Alike
The city of Jonstown and the surrounding area, all in the
world of Glorantha, is the setting for the RuneQuest
Starter Set. This lets the gamemaster provide their
adventurers with a base of operations and a ready
source for adventures, either from the ones provided
in Book 3: SoloQuest and Book 4: Adventures, or
new and original exploits in the area.
Though some of the information in this booklet is
not public knowledge, players are encouraged to read
this volume as well, familiarizing themselves with Glorantha and Jonstown, if desired. If they are newcomers
to the town, it’s a good idea to ask them to refrain
from going too deep into it, giving them insights their
adventurers wouldn’t know. Once they know their way
around, by all means players should familiarize themselves with Jonstown, giving them a firm grasp of this
place, their new home.

Kinship groups or city-states are the usual form of social
organization; a chieftain, king, queen, or other supreme
authority holds power. A common form of leadership is the
ring, whether tribal, clan, or city, usually made up of elders or
powerful individuals within the community. The ruler is usually
a priestly figure as well, and priest-kings are the norm in much
of Glorantha. The gods and their rival cults actively engage in
the day-to-day lives of their followers. However, most gods are
complementary, and rarely oppose each other directly. Only
the gods of Power are actively antagonistic; and only within
their own spheres of interest. Most Gloranthan societies are
polytheistic and recognize multitudes of gods. Religions rarely
proselytize.
Temples are usually the most powerful institution in any
community in Glorantha, and provide training in magic,
knowledge, and skills, as well as usually becoming second
homes to their cult members. These temples are often guarded

Chapter Name

3

RuneQuest

Th e Wo r l d o f G l o r a n t h a

by mystic spirits called wyters, semi-divine beings connected
magically to the chief priest or priestess in attendance.
Unlike some fantasy settings, there is no alignment, as
such. People have loyalties to nations, cities, religions, and
tribes, not to abstract concepts. Instead, each adventurer
belongs to the cult of their people by birth, social position,
or occupation: the notion of ‘conversion’ makes little sense to
most Gloranthans. One can leave one’s cult or join another,
but one rarely completely abandons old gods for new; far more
common is to add a new god to the existing multitude. It is
also possible for people within the game to survive quite well
with no allegiances whatsoever, except to themselves.
However, despite its similarities with Earth’s own Bronze
Age, Glorantha is very much a magical and fantastic world.
Demigods as powerful as regiments of soldiers transform
battlefields in ways that have no equivalent to warfare in our
ancient world. The Lunar Empire has magical weapons such
as a colossal flying Chaos demon that devours entire armies,
and units of magicians who can call down comets to devastate
their foes. Dragon Pass is dominated by Kero Fin Mountain,
which at nearly 12 kilometers high (7 miles) is far taller than
Mount Everest and looks more like a needle than a mountain.
There are sleeping dragons many kilometers in length that
locals have long mistaken for strange ranges of hills. There
are talking ducks and baboons, flying bulls, sentient fish, and
numerous immortal beings and races. Buildings and statues are
often brightly (even garishly) painted. The landscape is dotted
with the ruins of previous human civilizations, and even the
ruins of ancient God Time places.
Bronze itself is most commonly made when redsmiths mix
copper and tin, though it can also be mined directly from the
bones of the gods that died in the Gods War, which provide
a particularly pure form of the metal. It is used throughout
the civilized world and whenever a Gloranthan item is made
of metal not otherwise characterized, it is made of bronze.
Bronze armor is as much about displaying status as it is
about protection. Other metals such as lead, gold, silver, and
quicksilver have magical properties of their own, and may be
made into weapons or armor. The most important and prized
metal, however, is iron, which may be found as treasure, given
as a valuable gift, or bought or stolen from the dwarfs—it
cannot be mined or made by humans. Untempered iron can
make it difficult to cast magic, and carrying it reduces the
chance magic can affect someone wearing or bearing it. Certain
of the Elder Races are vulnerable to iron, as iron weapons cause
them additional harm.
Pure metal items can be enchanted, and these Rune metal
items may have inherent magical properties.

4

What is Glorantha?
Widely considered one of the greatest fantasy settings
of all time, Glorantha has influenced works like A Game
of Thrones, The Elder Scrolls, and Warcraft. Over 50 years
old, the world of Glorantha is one of gaming’s deepest,
most enduring, and most influential fantasy creations.
It’s been the setting of several board games, many
RPGs (most notably RuneQuest), and two popular
computer games. The Guide to Glorantha crowdfunding
campaign raised hundreds of thousands of dollars.
Glorantha is a singularly unique setting. You won’t
find the standard fantasy tropes of knights, wizards,
halflings, and elves here. Instead, the heroes are Bronze
Age warriors and mystics, all of whom can cast their
own personal magic and can enter the realm of the
gods, reenact myths and even change them, and
become gods themselves.
There are hideous Chaos monsters, mysterious
Elder Races, and even talking ducks. But what makes
Glorantha special is how it intertwines the personal,
spiritual, and mythical. No other fantasy world has
so much mythological resonance or inherent thematic impact.
If you can become a god, what does it mean to be
human? If the enemy is your own shadow, no more
or less evil than you, then can you ever truly conquer
them? Or are you just fighting your own reflection?

T he Runes
The Runes are a key feature of the world of Glorantha. They
are cosmic archetypes—the Elements, the Powers, Conditions,
and the Forms that make up the universe. An adventurer’s
affinity with different Runes affects their magical potential,
personality, and even characteristics. The Runes are the source
of the gods’ powers, and drove the cosmogonic cycle known
as the Gods War.
The Elemental Runes are commonly conceived as being
arranged on a wheel, where Fire/Sky is overcome by Water,
Water by Air, Air by Earth, Earth by Darkness, and Darkness
by Fire/Sky before the wheel cycles again. Power Runes are
inherently conflicting polarities, such as Fertility and Death,
Movement and Stasis, Harmony and Disorder. Neither side is
good or bad: their principles are merely opposed to one another.
These conflicts between Runes are embedded deeply into
the Gloranthan setting. They are the cosmic powers that define
Glorantha and are manifested by the gods. Known from the
earliest prehistory, Runes suffuse everything in and about the
world. Some may have even changed over time! The earliest
gods are associated with Runes.
Some philosophers hold that the gods themselves are
merely personifications of Runic forces. The real relationship
between gods and Runes is likewise unclear: the very question

Th e Wo r l d o f G l o r a n t h a

Elemental Runes
Name

Rune

Description

Darkness

Water

Earth

Fire/Sky

Air

Moon

Skill Category

Weapons

o

Said to be the most ancient Elemental Rune, the First Born, from
whom all other Elements were born or descended. Darkness
was the first Element to arise out of the Primal Chaos. Its
characteristic is SIZ, and its color is black.

Stealth

Club, mace,
rock

w

Water was born of Darkness. As an Element, it is called Son of
Darkness, Pathway to the Underworld, and Supporter of the
Earth. Its characteristic is DEX, and its color is blue.

Agility

Net, trident,
whip

e

Earth is the third Element, Daughter of the Seas, Mother of
the Sky, Wife to Many, Supporter of All. At least half the cults
in Glorantha include the Earth in some manifestation or other,
as Life-Giver, Stone-Father, Shaker, or Primal Ancestress. Its
characteristic is CON, and its color is green.

Communication

Axe

.

The Sky is different from the Air, for Air separates the Sky and
the Earth. After its defeat by its son, the Sky has been aloof from
mankind, although vestiges of its worship, such as the Sun Dome
Temple, are still present in the land. Its characteristic is INT, and
its color is yellow.

Perception

Spear, bow

g

Air is the Fifth Born, the Son of Earth and Sky (Sky was also the
son of Earth). It is the Breaker of Laws, Destroyer of Heaven,
Fighter Against Darkness, and Liberator of the Sun. It usually
manifests as a storm god, such as Orlanth in Sartar or the Storm
Bull of Prax. Its characteristic is STR, and its color is orange.

Manipulation

Sword

/

Moon is the Sixth Element, little accepted amongst its peers.
Outside the Lunar Empire it has hardly any presence at all,
though the Moon is sometimes considered a Condition Rune. Its
characteristic is POW, and its color is red.

Magic

Curved
blades (kopis,
sickle-sword)

Power Runes
Name

Rune

Description
Said to represent the Divine Harp with which Order was separated from Chaos. It is quite ancient
and revered throughout Glorantha.

Stasis

l
j
c

Movement

s

Denotes the ancient wheel. As usual, there are claims for it to be the First Rune, for there would
have been no growth from Chaos without it. Folktales speak of the World Bird which escaped from
the Maws of Chaos upon this wheel.

Truth

y

A Rune of the ancient, all-seeing Sky gods. Said to represent the torch that mortals used to escape
from Chaos in the Great Darkness and to survive until the Dawn. Yet another candidate for First
Rune, for its constancy and order set creation apart from random, unsettled Chaos.

Illusion

i

The Puppeteer Troupe, the major cult of the Father of Illusion, always claimed that this was the First
Rune, for without Illusion, there would be none of us to think we ever were. They refuse to explain
further.

Fertility

x

Symbolizes the Ancient Cup from which the whole world was poured at the dawn of creation. This
is the symbol of growth and life.

Death

t

Known to be the First Sword, the immortal and cursed weapon which the god Humakt used to
bring death to the world. Others claim this to be the first of the Runes, citing the separation of the
world from Chaos as the first action in creation.

Harmony
Disorder

Directly derived from Chaos. Anarchistic cults claim that this was the first step of creation from
Chaos, therefore Disorder is the First Born of the Powers and the foundation of the universe.
This Rune is connected with the art of alchemy, and the dwarfs. They claim that this is the First Rune,
for it provided the foundation from which all else was created.

5

RuneQuest

Form Runes
Name

Rune

Description

Beast

B

This Rune is also called the Dragon’s Eye and is supposed to represent the armor plate over the
eye of a dragon. Dragons are thought to be the progenitors of all beasts (at least those with four
or more legs) though no one has had the nerve to ask a dragon about it. It is thought to have
originally been a Dragonewt Rune, and its complexity would indicate this.

Man

,

This Rune represents the humanoid shape and is common among all humanoid races. Some other
races interpret it as “slave” or “food.” It is said to represent Grandfather Mortal, and numerous
folktales are told about him.

Plant

p

The symbol of the first life upon Glorantha. It is said to symbolize the first Plant god, a son of the
Earth and Sea. Many cults have a connection with the Plant Rune, such as Aldrya, whose worship
combines the Runes of Earth, Plant, and the Power Rune of Fertility.

A
b
?

As exotic as the race it represents, it is found only in the Dragon Pass area. Unlike most of the other
Form Runes, it is never used with an Elemental Rune. The original owners were Dragonewts.

Dragonewt
Spirit
Chaos

This Rune describes disembodied entities existing in the Spirit World.
Descriptive of beings tainted by Chaos. The Chaos Rune might be combined with any other Rune,
as nothing is totally safe from its influence.

uttered aloud in the wrong context has caused blood to be
shed. Even the gods of knowledge are cryptic on this subject;
the relationship may simply be beyond human comprehension.
To the pragmatic, it doesn’t matter. Runes are symbols with
latent power. People mark their possessions and even their
bodies with Runes. Runes not only characterize reality but can
be used to manipulate the world. Looking at or writing a Rune
isn’t enough, however: these powers can only be unlocked by
those with extensive training and preparation, such as shamans,
priests, or sorcerers.
As Rune affinities develop and an adventurer’s magical
potential increases, the adventurer becomes a Rune Master,
adept at their use, using that power to take part in the looming
Hero Wars, an apocalyptic battle with Chaos.

Types of Runes
As noted above, there are four types of Runes: Elements, Forms,
Conditions, and Powers. Each god has one or more specialties
within the forces described by the Runes. These are the areas
in which the god and its followers are the most effective and
versatile. To say that a god is a Fire/Sky Rune god, an Illusion
god, or whatever, is to say that the followers of that god
specialize in those areas. The specific Runes, categorized by
class, are described below.

it certain connotations, such as a personality type, a group of
related skills, one or more weapons, one or more bodily organs,
a color, a metal, and in some cases, a type of living being.

Powers
Said to symbolize the members of the Celestial Court, the
Power Runes are unique in that they are formed in mutually
antagonistic pairs, each balanced against another at an
existential and philosophical level, such as Harmony and
Disorder. Unlike Elemental Runes, which form a continuum,
Power Runes are defined by the degree to which they differ
from their opposites.
Opposing cults often have opposing Power Runes as part of
their identities. A cult of great power may be able to worship
two non-paired Powers, but it very rarely has more than those
two. Cults rarely have access to two paired Powers.

Forms
These are descriptive Runes. A god is usually described as being
of a Power or Element, and the form determines how its Power
or Elemental force is expressed. The Form Runes have many
variants and sub-Runes, and are sometimes known by other
names, but these cover the ground adequately enough.

Conditions
Elements
The Elements are what Glorantha is made of. Five elements
are widely recognized, though a sixth element—Moon—is
grudgingly acknowledged. Each Elemental Rune carries with

6

There are five widely acknowledged Condition Runes. They
indicate which aspect of an Element, Form, or Power is favored
by a cult. Some cults believe that other Conditions exist, but
they have not been as universally accepted.

Th e Wo r l d o f G l o r a n t h a

Condition Runes
Name

Rune

Description

Mastery

W

This all-purpose Rune can symbolize the mastery of mortals, of magic, or of elements. As the mastery of
mortals, it describes a Hero; as the mastery of magic, it symbolizes any cult of reasonable power. The use
of this Rune usually masks the true identifying Runes of the cult or person described, although it may
also signify the independence of a Hero or powerful magician from cult ties.

Magic

R

Ubiquitous in this magic-rich world, this Rune describes how a cult or individual deals with the power of
another Rune. Since it is impossible to deal with Runes without magic, this Rune is especially important.

Infinity

S

The mark of the gods. One who possesses the Infinity Rune is almost like a god. This Rune is not used
lightly, as it implies total control of the power flow around the user, making them invulnerable to almost
all magic. It is characteristic of gods, dragons, and the greatest Heroes only.

Luck

K

Thought to be both an expression of Chaos as well as the stamp of approval of the gods, this Rune is
little used, except in the Holy Country, where the Masters of Luck and Death proudly display the symbol
of the chance they take with every breath.

Fate

X

Very few cults use this as an expression of the way of the world. Instead, it is used by downtrodden
cultures that have no other explanation for their status, and conversely by those at the top, to justify
their own positions.

Magic

Gods a nd Cults

A central theme of Glorantha is the relationship between
mortals and the gods, between the mythical and Mundane
Worlds. Gloranthan religion and magic are basic to existence
and accepted by everyone. The gods are acknowledged,
experienced, and exert powerful influence upon the world. The
most prevalent religious practice in Glorantha is polytheism.
An individual worshiper may have a special relationship with
their chosen deity but acknowledges and often worships other
gods. Other religious practices exist as well, such as shamanism,
philosophical materialism, and mystical illumination. The
omnipresence of magic in Glorantha means that day-to-day
life is different in many ways from that which we experience.
Life centers around a person’s cult or religion.
Magic is a source of both increased safety and ease of life
but is also a source of conflict and terror. In Glorantha, magic
plays a decisive, even primary, role in warfare. Priests cast bolts
of lightning or call down flames from the heavens; shamans
unleash spirits like the all-consuming Oakfed; Rune Masters
of war or storm gods shatter regiments; and the Lunar Empire
has units like the Field School of Magic, the Crater Makers,
or the awesome Crimson Bat that devastates entire armies. In
Glorantha, victory is often not on the side with the biggest
battalions, but the side with the mightiest gods and spirits!
This can have surprising results; for example, a band of huntergatherers, backed up by powerful shamans, can overwhelm a
superior civilized phalanx lacking magical support. In melee
combat, magic is similarly decisive. When two equally skilled
weapon masters fight, the one with the better magic usually wins.
A combat-oriented adventurer is wise to join the cult of a war god!

One of the most important decisions a player can make is what
cult the adventurer belongs to. An adventurer’s cult is often their
most important resource, providing communication between
mortals and the cosmic entities known as gods. More than mere
patron deities or names to swear by, a cult is an extended family.
It provides the adventurer with training in skills and magic and
gives guidance to the adventurer in the form of Passions such as
Devotion or Loyalty. A cult is a community as well as a religion
and provides for the many needs of mortal beings.
Membership in a cult gives access to a fraction of its deity’s
power, manifested in the form of Rune magic. An adventurer
must have a strong affinity with one or more Runes shared with
a deity to join its cult. A cult also teaches less powerful—but
more ubiquitous—magic called spirit magic to its members.
In exchange, the member supports the cult with sacrifices,
worship, and loyalty.
Through participation in worship ceremonies, the
adventurer’s ability to use magic relating to the god is
maintained and strengthened, and cults and their members
provide an important source of adventures and goals, as well
as potential conflict.
Furthermore, each cult has its elite members, called Rune
Masters. These Rune Priests, Rune Lords, or God-talkers
each possess greater magic power and a more intense affinity
with the god, but at the cost of greater responsibility and
attention from that god’s enemies!
In short, the cult provides support for the adventurer’s way
of life. By advancing within a cult, an adventurer gains magical
power and important temporal resources.

7

RuneQuest
Following are some of the more important Gloranthan
deities and the Runes they are associated with. If a deity has
more than one instance of a Rune, they are considered to ‘own’
it. They are listed in the table below, then in more depth below.

Important Gods
Gods are real in Glorantha, and though not always worshiped,
they are certainly acknowledged. Important deities
acknowledged by everyone in the Dragon Pass area include:

Aldrya, Goddess of the Woods
This goddess rules in pine forests, deciduous woodlands, or
tropical jungle. She commands everything within the woods:
plants, animals, wells and springs, bright glades and dappled
glens, emptiness and shadow, ghosts and terrifying spirits.
Aldrya is also mother of elves and dryads, who are her
servants in the forests. In ancient times, the Green Age,
Aldrya and the elves ruled all of the world. She is bitter now
about the loss, which explains why woods are intrinsically
creepy to mankind.

Ernalda, the Earth Mother
Ernalda is the Earth Mother and the most favored of all
the Earth goddesses. Among her titles are Earth Queen, the
Life-Giver, the Beautiful One, the Great Green Lady, Source
of Bounty, the Giver, the Sustainer, Wife of Many, Supporter
of All, and Midwife of Time. She and her daughters are
the source of food, shelter, and society for most of life.
She is the goddess of women, female sexuality, fertility,
and motherhood.
Ernalda has many husbands, but the foremost of them
is Orlanth. She presides over a sprawling pantheon of Earth
deities, both benevolent and malign.
The Ernalda cult is of vast importance everywhere, even
if her priestesses do not always possess direct political power.

Eurmal, the Trickster
Trickster God, Fool, Lawbreaker, Outlaw, and Scapegoat, he is
nonetheless one of the Seven Lightbringers. He is a dangerous
and treacherous god, but he wields great divine power.

Humakt, the God of Death
Argan Argar, God of Surface Darkness
Argan Argar was a leader among the trolls during the Darkness.
He is messenger and translator for the troll pantheon, and the
god of merchants. He is popular with trollkin, who claim that
Argan Argar first taught them how to use spears.

Babeester Gor, the Avenging Daughter
When the Gods War made the world evil, the earth brought
forth its own grim defender. Babeester Gor was born from her
mother’s corpse, axes in hand, body ritually scarred to carry
deadly magic. She destroyed all kin-slayers, all oath-breakers
who swore by her mother, and everything which desecrated
the sacred places of the earth.

Chalana Arroy, the Healer
This goddess is one of the Seven Lightbringers and is also Yelm’s
Handmaiden. She knows how to heal all diseases and wounds,
and she healed the world after the Great Darkness. Her worship
is widespread, but few of her people know her directly, instead
worshiping parts of her or the powerful healing spirits readily
available from this lofty deity.

Daka Fal, the Judge of the Dead
Daka Fal walked the world and separated the living from the
dead, setting each in his place, making known to all their duties
and affairs. He is invoked whenever people worship the dead.

8

The mythology of Humakt is a long and unfinished tale of
woe. Yet amid the multiple agonies which the God of Death
bestows, this god also reveals a glimmer of hope. He idealizes
the honorable intentions and beliefs of most men with a singleminded direction. He was born a child of the Primal Air, but
he severed his ties to them when they used Death dishonorably.
Though Humakt is no longer kin to the air gods, he usually
remains their friend.

Issaries, the Speaking God
Lord of Trade, Guardian of Roads, and Messenger of the Gods,
Issaries is one of the Seven Lightbringers and psychopomp of
that pantheon. Initiates of his cult are merchants and heralds,
protected by their god’s reputation and power. The cult
language, Tradetalk, is the closest thing to a common tongue
in all Glorantha. The cult spread widely during the time of the
Jrusteli empire, and still possesses widespread acceptance and
influence, ever thirsty for more.

Kyger Litor, the Mother of Trolls
This is the ancestress of all the troll races of the world, and she
is widely worshiped. When the sun was slain, she invaded the
surface world with her minions, where they conquered the
land and, eventually, bore the brunt of the fighting against
Chaos. The cult is simple and primitive, often savage or brutal
in human opinion, but satisfying to the primal trolls.

Th e Wo r l d o f G l o r a n t h a

Rune Cults
Deity
Aldrya
Argan Argar
Babeester Gor
Chalana Arroy
Daka Fal
Ernalda
Eurmal
Humakt
Issaries
Kyger Litor
Lhankor Mhy
Magasta
Maran Gor
Mostal
Orlanth
The Red Goddess
The Seven Mothers
Storm Bull
Yelm
Yelmalio

Runes

epx
ol
et
lxl
,b,
xeel
iji
tyt
ls
o,
yc
swwt
tej
cec
sggW
x//?
/xt
gBt
x..t
Oy

Description
The goddess of forests and mother of the elves.
The god of surface Darkness, leader to the trolls.
The Avenging Daughter, a goddess of bloodshed and reprisal.
The goddess of healing. One of the Seven Lightbringers.
The father of all mortals and Judge of the Dead.
The Earth Queen and goddess of women, agriculture, and fertility.
The god of lies and deceit. One of the Seven Lightbringers.
The god of endings, Death, and war.
The god of merchants, travelers, and speakers. One of the Seven
Lightbringers.
An underworld goddess who resides beneath the Castle of Lead.
The god of scribes, sages, and writing. One of the Seven Lightbringers.
The mighty ruler of the seas and oceans.
The Earthshaker. Sister to Ernalda and a goddess of destruction.
The Maker, the dwarf god who tends the World Engine, keeping it running.
The leader of the Seven Lightbringers and king of the gods.
The Goddess of the Red Moon and goddess of the Lunar Empire, daughter
of the Seven Mothers.
The primary pantheon of the Lunar Empire.
Enemy of Chaos and a manifestation of berserk, barbaric fury.
The god of the Sun, who dies each night only to return with the dawn.
The Bright God, son of Yelm and patron of the Sun Dome Temple.

RuneQuest

The Elder Races
Although humans are currently the dominant sentient species in Glorantha, the Elder Races still have great power. The Elder
Races of Glorantha predate the appearance of humans in the world. The Elder Races include many small, strictly local, or
otherwise insignificant creatures. The following are powerful enough to dominate significant parts of the world, though
some live alongside humankind:
Aldryami: These slight beings, commonly called elves,
Merfolk: These are water-living but air-breathing
are closer to plants than mammals. They worship and
creatures, whose lower bodies are finned, but who have
claim descent from the goddess Aldrya. Most are tied to
arms and hands. Merfolk are direct descendants of the
a specific type of forest: green coniferous elves (the most
gods and fall into several types.
common), brown deciduous temperate elves, yellow
Trolls: This mostly subterranean species spilled onto
tropical elves, fungal black elves, red fern elves, dryads,
the surface world when Yelm’s light chased them
and degenerate ‘runners.’ All despise dwarfs and trolls.
from the Underworld. Several types of trolls may live
Dragonewts: Said to be the eldest creatures in
in one community. Social status is determined by an
Glorantha, descendants of Dragons from before the
individual’s type. They are matriarchal and generally do
Golden Age, Dragonewts continually reincarnate and
not bother with civilized niceties, even in their largest
metamorphose, ever-striving to achieve dragonhood,
gatherings. Trolls are not as gregarious as humans,
each going through four distinct phases as it evolves:
and lone trolls or small family hunting groups are
crested, beaked, tailed priest, and full priest, who can
common. Troll villages are ramshackle and small. Types
become almost akin to Dragons. They have their own
of trolls include the dark trolls, great trolls, Mistress
type of magic and are quite secretive.
Race, trollkin, and cave trolls. Dark trolls are the most
Mostali: Commonly called dwarfs, these underground
common, Mistress Race the rarest and most ancient,
dwellers descend from Mostal the Maker, whom the
and trollkin are a degenerate, diminutive offspring
dwarfs claim crafted the World. They have a long and
of trolls, the result of an ancient curse. Trolls avoid
ancient history, unknown to outsiders, and use a sort
sunlight and live contentedly in the dark. Their prodiof practical sorcery. They are makers and crafters of
gious appetites are said to be able to digest anything,
many ingenious devices, and their metalwork is unparincluding solid rock (although they dislike it). Trolls are
alleled. Unlike elves and trolls, dwarfs are only of one
almost always seen munching on something.
species, but have many sub-types based on their role
Broo: These foul creatures of Chaos are ubiquitous
within Mostali community, differing so substantially
in Glorantha despite many efforts to eradicate them.
they might as well be different races. They are almost
They are a rank Chaos species, long since polluted by
inhuman in temperament, their society cultivating a
foul practices. Their parentage is often totally indistinct.
machine-like state of mind. Many Mostali rebel against
Each may differ from his brother, though most that
this, seeking adventure in the outside world. Dwarfs are
survive are vaguely humanoid. They are brutal beyond
mortal foes of elves and trolls.
belief. The less said about them the better.

.

.
.

.

.

.

Many other obscure or lesser creatures live in Glorantha. Centaurs, ducks, intelligent baboons, mer-people, giants,
morokanth, newtlings, scorpion men, and Wind Children are only a few of the many lesser Elder Races.

10

Th e Wo r l d o f G l o r a n t h a

Lhankor Mhy, the Knowing God
Keeper of the Laws, Scribe of the Immortals, and History
Singer are his titles. He is the god of the Gray Lords, the
Sages of Glorantha. One of the Seven Lightbringers, during
that epic voyage he inherited, found, fought for, and stole
many pieces of the old powers, preserving them safely to
re-enter Time. Holder of the sacred Stone Scrolls forged in
the Underworld to hide the secrets of the Compromise from
immature souls, even so his knowledge is incomplete, and he
and his cult thirst for more.

Magasta, the Lord of Waters
Magasta is the son of Daliath and Framanthe, the moving source
of life in the waters. His family personifies the tremendous
primal forces of the sea, but Magasta directs them. He is King
of the Sea Gods, master of life and death within the depths.

Maran Gor, the Earthshaker
A sister of Ernalda, she was once generous and kind. When
the troubles of the Gods War came, she took the title of
Gor, and became an object of fear and awe. She was then a
destroyer and was powerful and famous during that black
time. Now she is only actively worshiped by those that enjoy
the carnage which is her most precious gift. Most great earth
temples still include shrines to this deity, and prayers are sent
to deflect her wrath.

Mostal, the Maker
Machine God, Keeper of the World Mill, and Master of Stone
are some of his titles. Mostal is believed to be a son of the earth
and mighty Acos, god of Law from the Celestial Court. From
his father he inherited power over stone, which is sometimes
called the Lawful Element. He was skilled at all kinds of
making and building and has an inborn distrust and lack of
understanding for Aldrya. In the God Time he and his brother
Stone were slain by elves. Now, dwarfs work steadfastly to repair
Mostal’s machine, so that the world works correctly again.

Orlanth, the Storm King
Master of Storms, Death Wielder, Bringer of Light, and King
of the Gods are some of Orlanth’s titles. Orlanth is the chief of
the Seven Lightbringers. His worship is very widespread. He is
a dire foe of the Red Goddess of the Lunar Empire.
When known as Orlanth Adventurous, his skills as a poet,
fighter, and lover are praised and learned. His aspect of Orlanth
Thunderous represents the power the god possesses over the
natural elements of storm. As Orlanth Rex, he is praised and
worshiped to share in his skill at rule. He knows justice and
leadership, fine rhetoric, and other skills needed to rule.

Many lesser spirits are attached to his cult. His religion is
one of the largest and most complete in the world, as is only
fitting for the King of the Gods.

The Red Goddess
Moon Goddess, Mistress of Time, Sister of Chaos, and Lurker
upon the Veil are some other titles of this unique goddess. She
was born in the Gods Age, but was broken and scattered in
prehistoric wars; not slain, but not alive either. Her religion is
a strange mixture of mysticism and practical magic, of barbaric
cruelty and dignified beauty, of freedom and of tyranny. Its
philosophies are unique and complex. Although she was born
inside of Time, and is therefore mortal, she quickly developed
her internal abilities and set off upon a dread Godquest which
ended with her apotheosis only 27 years later.
The Red Goddess earned and worked and danced and
fought her way into the fabric of the world. She has taken
for her domain the Middle Air, and so has earned the eternal
enmity of Orlanth and other air gods. Her cult spreads beyond
the bounds of her Empire and is very powerful. It includes
many lesser deities within it.

The Seven Mothers
These gods are mothers to the Red Goddess and their combined
pantheon is the official state religion of the Lunar Empire.
Unlike many Gloranthan cults, the Red Goddess cult is
actively trying to recruit new believers and convert others
to their religion. Their magic is strongly tied to the cycles of
Glorantha’s red moon.
Despite their name, three of the “Mothers” are male. The
seven demigods who conspired to resurrect the Red Goddess
were Teelo Norri, Jakaleel the Witch, Queen Deezola, She
Who Waits, Danfive Xaron, Yanafal Tarnils, and Irrippi Ontor.
Associated cults include Etyries, Hwarin Dalthippa, Yara Aranis,
Hon-eel, the Red Goddess, and the Young Elementals.

Storm Bull
Storm Bull is a god of untamed animal power and passion.
His wild and intense fury could even beat Chaos, and so
the berserk deity led the war of the Greater Darkness. He
fought the Devil to a standstill and trapped him under a
mountain of adamant. Thus, he is grudgingly tolerated in
many regions.

Waha, the Butcher
Waha is the son of the Storm Bull. He appeared in Prax, among
the leaderless people of the area, teaching them the new ways
necessary to survive, and taking wives from among them to
breed new dynasties. Among his many great deeds are the

11

RuneQuest
digging of the Good Canal to cleanse the earth; the taming of
Oakfed, god of wildfire; and teaching people and animals each
their proper stations for the new world.

Yelm, the Imperial Sun
God of the Middle Fire and brother of Lodril and Dayzatar.
Yelm was not always bound to his path in the Sky but traveled
freely during the God Time. His disastrous feud with Orlanth
was one of the most important struggles of the Gods War,
for when he was slain by Orlanth, his demise marked the
Lesser Darkness which filled all the cosmos with fear, allowing
Chaos to seep in.
Yelm is worshiped in the Lunar Empire as the Solar Emperor
and in the Grazelands as the Imperial Sun Horse.

Yelmalio, the Bright God
Yelmalio is the bright sun that brings light but not heat. He
is a son of Yelm and sometimes friend and sometimes foe of
Orlanth. He’s best known for the Sun Dome Temples that
provide mercenaries to both the Orlanthi and their enemies.

Unique Aspects of
Glor a n t h a
Glorantha has a flavor all its own, and differs greatly from
other fantasy settings. These elements go beyond mere flavor
and are embedded within its very nature, affecting almost
everyone within it. It is a good idea when gamemastering or
playing to understand these concepts, or at least be passingly
familiar with them.

Heroes and Heroquesting
Heroquesting is a magical act where mortals directly interact
with Gloranthan mythology. The participants endeavor to
reenact mythological events to bring some of that magic into
the Mundane World. Heroquesting is fraught with peril, as it
is unpredictable and often deadly. Failure can bring not only
ruin to the participants, but to their communities and cults.
Heroquesting allows the individual to simultaneously interact
with mythology and with the Mundane World.
A Hero is someone that has walked this dangerous path
and has been changed by it. The Hero is endowed with
exceptional powers and uses those gifts to battle against
enemies that endanger the peace and well-being of the
community. And yet, the Hero is not bound by the rules
and restrictions of the civilization they defend and is rarely
at home in the civilized world. Inevitably, the Hero’s role is
to fight in the Hero Wars.

12

Kinship
In the violent world of Glorantha, an adventurer without kin is
a lonely and isolated person. Adventurers have their immediate
family—their parents, siblings, children, and spouse—and a
larger kinship group such as a clan. Clan loyalty is basic. If there
is ever a dispute between members or families within a clan, the
chieftain and council are expected to settle the matter quickly and
pragmatically. At the same time, whenever a member becomes
embroiled in difficulties with people or things outside the clan,
the chieftain is expected to judge the situation properly and then
rally or extricate the rest of the clan from the problem.
An adventurer’s kinfolk support them against enemies, pay
their ransom them if they are captured, and avenge them when
injured. All these functions are important during play, not just
considerations for roleplaying. For example, a blood feud is
a threat to adventurers that could injure others when carried
out by the relatives of their victims. A seemingly hapless herder
might be avenged by their more powerful kinfolk.
Clans are united into tribes, which function as petty
kingdoms. Tribes resolve disputes between member clans and
protect them from outsiders.
Sometimes, tribes are confederated together around a city.
Sartar and Tarsh are both confederations of tribes and cities,
united by royal dynasties.

Community
Adventurers often serve their community, whether it is a
band of hunters, a clan of farmers and herders, a temple,
or a cosmopolitan city-state. Without a community, an
adventurer is nothing more than a destructive outlaw. Within
a community, adventurers are avatars, personifications of a
million dreams, prayers, and curses, the hopes and fears of
the future made flesh.
The gamemaster should keep this in mind when planning
the background of the game, and the players should remember
this in the way they portray their adventurers. Give the
adventurers families, complete with siblings, parents, and other
kin. Having a few of the adventurers be related by blood or
by duty helps reinforce that sense of community. Give them
connections to their community and a reason to care about it.
Adventurer backgrounds provide many opportunities
for shared relatives and social ties, as well as chances for
adventurers to have fought alongside one another in past
battles, or even to have been on opposite sides. A side effect
of linking the adventurers to a community is responsibility.
Players should think twice about having their adventurers act
like destructive killing machines when they need to consider
the consequences.

Th e Wo r l d o f G l o r a n t h a

13

RuneQuest

Ideals and Motivations
Heroic adventurers in Glorantha are often driven by powerful
emotions and their spiritual and religious impulses. They have
strong feelings about their world and are tied into the ongoing
and eternal cosmic conflict. In RuneQuest, this is represented
by Rune affinities and Passions that give significant bonuses
and abilities.
The gamemaster should always ensure that players have a
say in the behavior of their adventurers, but players should also
accept that high Passions and affinities risk being weakened
through contrary behavior. This does not result in an adventurer
being forced into a mold, nor is it the intention of the system
to take away the player’s ability to make decisions for their
adventurer. The system simply makes sure that adventurers
act in ways that are consistent with the Runes and Passions
that drive them, even when there is a cost. An adventurer
without deep Passions or strong Rune affinities is weak and
at a disadvantage compared to the passionate adventurers that
throw themselves unreservedly into the Hero Wars.

Advancement
Each adventurer begins with skills appropriate to their
background and past profession, but they are not limited
to these skills. They can learn skills from trainers, choose to
study new fields of interest, and improve the skills they use
successfully while adventuring. If an adventurer wants to learn
a spell that their cult doesn’t teach, they can try to learn it from
another associated cult. If an assistant shaman adventurer wants
to learn how to be a better archer, it’s only a matter of finding
a qualified teacher and spending the time and money to learn!

The Passage of Time
Time can pass quickly. In RuneQuest, the assumption is that
one season passes each time the adventurers have an adventure.
In little more than a month of playing every week, a game year
has passed. After a real year, the adventurers may be a decade
older. A long campaign may span a generation or more.
Adventurers typically have social obligations beyond
adventuring. They are members of cults and clans, with seasonal
holy days and other events. They may have farms to manage,
families to take care of, warriors to command, or even tribes
to lead. A seasonal time scale permits acknowledgement (and
even roleplaying) of these other obligations, without getting
bogged down in daily details.

Deadly Combat
One of the most heralded features of RuneQuest is its detailed,
deadly combat, where each blow, parry, and dodge are resolved
through dice rolls in a moment-by-moment combat cycle.

14

Time in Glorantha
Most dating systems in Glorantha begin with the Dawn,
when the god Yelm rose into the sky and inaugurated the
age of history. Created in the Dawn Age by the people of
Dragon Pass, this system is called Solar Time (ST) and is the
most common time measurement system in the world. The
current year is 1625 ST.
A Gloranthan day is the time needed for the sun to traverse the sky from east to west. A night is the time needed
for the sun to traverse the Underworld from west to east.
Seven days, measured from one dusk to the next, make up
one week. Eight weeks (56 days) make up one Season. Five
Seasons plus a 14-day interim called Sacred Time, make up
one-year. A Gloranthan year is 294 days long.
The following seasons are based on the weather patterns
of Dragon Pass and nearby Peloria, but they have been generally adopted in all the regions of the world.
Season: Comparable to spring, this season opens
. Sea
the new year and is a time of planting, new births for
beasts, and gentle rains.

Season: A hot, dry summer period, this is the time
. ofFirewarming,
ripening, and growing. It is also the time of
war when men are free from the toils of the soil.

Earth Season: Harvest time and when animals are
. slaughtered
to prepare for the oncoming cold.
Season: Night and ice demons wander about
. Dark
the land bringing snow and storms upon hapless

.

.

humans. Trolls are most active during this time, while
brown elves sleep.
Storm Season: The last season of the year when
life and darkness spirits wage battle. Sometimes the
darkness spirits win and the ice and cold drag on for
weeks. Sometimes the spirits of life win, with springlike weather and new shoots and buds. Usually neither
is entirely victorious, and this is a time of violent
weather changes.
Sacred Time: A period of rebirth during which great
ceremonies are held while many nations put away
all strife to celebrate the coming spring. Oracles are
sought and spells are cast to protect the land. All
religious persons participate in re-enactments of
their creation myths. The massive release of energy
during this season is a major factor in rejuvenating
the cosmos. Failure to complete these acts results in
Chaos seeping into the world.

With a playable attention to how real-world, historic, and
even simulated combat is played out, RuneQuest combat is
both gritty and heroic at once, just like the epic stories and
myths it emulates.
Weapons can impale their targets, and armor is described
in terms of how much damage it can absorb per part of the
body it covers. Shields and weapons alike can become worn

Th e Wo r l d o f G l o r a n t h a

Sex and Marriage
Many Gloranthan religions celebrate sexuality as the cup of
life. Ernalda is the goddess of women and of sex, and has many
lovers and husbands among the gods, although Orlanth is first
among them. Orlanth even has a female incarnation, Vinga,
worshiped by women who wield Orlanth’s magic.
Heort’s Laws (an ancient document stating the laws and
customs of the Heortling people) recognize four sexes (female,
male, neuter, and both) and at least six genders (female, male,
vingan, nandan, helering, and none). Unmarried sex between
adults is not frowned upon, regardless of the sex or gender of
the parties.
Because sexuality is open, the marriage oath is significant.
Marriage among many Gloranthans is a bond between
participants and their clans, the marriage terms negotiated
between the parties and their families. Since marriage is
sanctified by divine oath, violating that oath is dangerous.
down and even break if they’re damaged too much, and when
a blow lands, everyone knows exactly where it hit, and how
much damage it caused.
Reach, speed, and weapon length become prime factors in
determining who strikes first… and who strikes last.

Gloranthan Money
Gloranthan coinage is based on silver. While both gold and
copper are used as coins, silver is by far the most common
monetary metal. The Middle Sea Empire first introduced silver
coinage into Glorantha. The basic currency in Dragon Pass
and Prax is the Lunar (abbreviated as L), a silver coin. Most
coins in circulation were minted by the Lunar Empire and
are stamped with the symbols of the Red Goddess. Before the
Lunar Conquest, silver coins called guilders were minted by
the various city guilds in Sartar and Pavis. All these coins are
roughly equivalent in value. A cow is worth about 20 L.
The first coinage of the world was gold, brought to the people
by the enigmatic Gold Wheel Dancers. In their honor, gold coins
are still called wheels. Gold, however, is scarce and valuable. One
golden wheel equals 20 L. Gold is still mainly used as a means of
settling debts between rulers rather than by individuals.
The dwarfs invented copper coins, but they were adopted by
the god Issaries to facilitate trade between peoples. The copper
coin is called a clack (C), or often just a copper. It takes ten
clacks to equal one Lunar. The bolg is a troll unit of exchange
made of lead, valued ten to a clack. The troll god Argan Argar
invented the bolg and it is the sole coinage used by his cult in
paying trollkin mercenaries. The lead bolg is unique as a unit
of money, for trolls also bite and crush them to use as sling
stones as well as handy cash.

T he Wor ld
Glorantha is not a globe, but instead is a slightly bulging,
squarish lozenge, the shape of the Earth Rune. It floats upon
Sramak’s River, the Primeval Ocean that encircles the world.
Between the Earth and Sky is the turbulent realm of the Air
gods. Underneath both Earth and Water is the dark, silent
Underworld. Beneath the Sky and the Air, and sitting on top
of the Earth, is the Middle World—the realm of mortals. It
has a northern and southern continent, and many islands.
The Sun rises from the east each morning, passes over the
Air, and across the Sky to set each evening in the west. It then
travels beneath the seas and the earth through the Underworld,
and finally again up to the eastern lands of the Dawn. While the
Sun is in the Underworld, the Goddess of Night rules the Sky.
The Sky itself is an off-center bowl, rotating about the
Pole Star which marks its center: the only stable point in the
Celestial Dome. Beyond the Sky is the Sky World. At night,
the stars show where the magical denizens of the Sky World
peer through to guard their followers below. Similarly, the
Underworld is populated by immortal creatures, as well as by
evil dreams and by the souls of the dead and unborn.
Beyond the Middle World are the lands of immensely
powerful supernatural races, such as Altinela, Vithela, or
Luathela. The beings of these lands occasionally come to the
world of men, but few men ever travel to them. Some are areas
of myth, like the Sea of Fire where the Sky fell to Earth and set
everything burning, or the Lands of Dawn and Dusk where
the Sun rises and sets each day. Only Heroes can travel to such
realms and survive, and from there they can find their way to
the very worlds of the gods.

15

RuneQuest
Genertela is the northernmost continent. It is colder than
the southern continent, and the northernmost regions are
uninhabited except by ice demons and snow trolls. The White
Sea separates the permanent winter from the northern lands
of mortals. The continent is temperate in climate, and in the
south the seasons are moderate.
The great central oceans of Glorantha are mild and almost
balmy, though seasons affect them. The many islands are
pleasant places, semitropical in nature. At the center of the
world, Magasta’s Pool draws all the world’s waters into it and
drops them to the dark primordial sea below.
The inhabited lands of the southern continent developed
independently from the north, though both cultures came into
violent conflict during the previous era, called the Second Age.
The northern coastal regions are extremely pleasant, but the
temperature increases the further south one travels. Beyond
the lands that men know are dense jungles and, finally, the
arid and unlivable Burning Wastes.
The world is everywhere populated by magical entities who
are personifications of things, who represent life essence, or
who are spiritual truths. Many of these beings are alive in
every sense, but many are not. Most people live only in the
normal, Mundane World, content to let shamans and Rune
Masters protect them.
But the influence of the magical world is always there.

Dr agon Pass
Dragon Pass is a mountainous region, centered on the
12-kilometer-high (7½-mile) mountain of Kero Fin, the highest
peak in Glorantha and birthplace of the major god Orlanth.
Although much of the area is rugged, there are many fertile
valleys and wooded hills. The actual Dragon Pass is a narrow
valley that crosses the continental divide near the sacred peak
of Kero Fin, but over the centuries the name has come to be
applied to the whole 225-kilometer-wide (140-mile) gap in
the Rockwood Mountains, and to the region around this gap.
Dragon Pass is also one of the most militarily significant
regions in Genertela. It offers the only passage suitable for
armies to cross from Peloria (ruled by the Lunar Empire) in
the north to the rich lands of Kethaela in the south. Much
of the region is easily defended terrain, such as forests, hills,
and mountains. Most importantly, its warlike population and
many magical entities make it a daunting region for any army
to pacify or conquer.
Two kingdoms have long fought for dominance in Dragon
Pass: Tarsh and Sartar. These kingdoms are destined to fight
over the control of Dragon Pass.

16

The Homelands of Dragon Pass
Dragon Pass has often been a hotbed of activity and now is the
focus of great and important events in Glorantha. It is likely
to be the site of the Hero Wars, a looming, apocalyptic battle
that will either transform or destroy the world. Though the
rest of the world is still active and thriving, with events great
and small transpiring all the time, RuneQuest focuses on the
Dragon Pass area as its initial setting for adventure.
The following six countries or regions make up Dragon Pass:

Sartar
Sartar is the default homeland for adventurers, a mountainous
kingdom made up of Storm-worshiping hill tribes united by
the royal house of Sartar. Sartar recently liberated itself from
the Lunar Empire, and in doing so began the Hero Wars. It is
ruled by Kallyr Starbrow, and is a hotbed of magical questing,
petty feuds, and would-be Heroes.
Others consider Sartarites to be quarrelsome, reckless, and
fiercely independent. Most are devoted to Orlanth and Ernalda
and hate the Lunar Empire with a burning passion.

Esrolia
This rich and civilized land is ruled by a matriarchy. Esrolia
is home to Earth Mother Ernalda and is the center for Earth
worship. Nochet, its capital city, is the largest in Glorantha,
ruled by the Queen of Esrolia. However, that magnificent city
is threatened by the Wolf Pirate fleets, fearsome reavers led by
the demigod Harrek the Berserk. Earlier though, these same
pirates were instrumental in defeating the Lunar Empire in
1624 and forcing it out of the Holy Country.
Esrolians think of themselves as civilized, curious, luxurious,
and sensual. Their styles set the standards in many lands. They

Th e Wo r l d o f G l o r a n t h a
are cosmopolitan, with knowledge of many distant realms.
They dislike war, and favor negotiation over open conflict.
Foreigners consider Esrolians as proud, ambitious, devious,
emotional, and quarrelsome.

Grazelands
The Grazelands are a region of grassy hills and valleys inhabited
by the Pony Breeders. This semi-nomadic tribe herds horses and
rules over serfs originally from Esrolia, Sartar, and Tarsh. Their
ruler is the Feathered Horse Queen, a powerful Earth priestess.
Otherwise, Pony Breeder society is rigid and patriarchal,
with everyone’s place determined by age and birth. The tribe
is divided into a dozen clans; clan chiefs are elected but few
among the populace are eligible. Pony Breeders consider
themselves innately superior to all ‘groundsfolk.’

Prax
These barbarian nomads reside in the chaparral plains east of
Dragon Pass. Each tribe rides and herds the beast it is named
for: bison, bolo lizard, high llama, impala, rhinoceros, sable
antelope, and even horses. Otherwise, the horse is strictly taboo
for most Praxians (except for the Pol-Joni).
Praxians are proud and warlike, distrusting outsiders
and each other. They hate Chaos with a passion and eschew
civilized cults. Their lives are harsh and cruel, full of war, the
very environment they live in hostile to them. A popular refrain
among the Praxians is “Life is War.”
These are the major human Praxian tribes:

. Bison: Bison Riders are dependent upon their heavy,
.
.
.
.

slow animals for their livelihood. Like their beasts, Bison
Riders are big and thick, slow but terrible on impact.
High Llama: High Llama Riders are the smallest Great
Tribe but are the most powerful. Their beasts tower over
other Praxian steeds and can run down even the swiftest
skirmishers. They fear no one on the plains.
Impala: Impala Riders make up for their diminutive size
with numbers, being the most populous tribe in Prax. They
rely on the speed and agility of their beasts to protect them.
Pol-Joni: The ‘Bastard Tribe,’ the Pol-Joni were horseriders from Dragon Pass. They fought their way onto
the plains and have the magical and martial strength to
remain there. They are sometimes considered one of the
tribes of Sartar.
Sable Riders: The Sable Tribe ride giant antelopes with
curving horns. When the Lunar Empire invaded Prax, the
Sables sided with them against the other Praxian tribes. The
Sables later turned against the Lunars, demonstrating the
temporary nature of any agreement among the Praxians.

Another species, the Morokanth, are intelligent, humanoid
tapirs, and herd nonintelligent humans.
At Prax’s edge is the River of Cradles, an arable river valley
dominated by the city of Pavis and old ruins called the Big
Rubble. The hero Argrath White Bull has united the Praxian
tribes behind his leadership and has proclaimed himself
King of Pavis.

Lunar Tarsh
The Kingdom of Tarsh is a province of the Lunar Empire and
its rulers and urban populations have adopted the civilized
culture and religion of the Lunar Heartlands.
Lunar Tarshites are proud and arrogant: they dominated
Dragon Pass for the last generation. They are loyal to the Red
Emperor and the Red Goddess but are now torn between
partisans of King Pharandros and those of his uncle, the great
general Fazzur Wideread.

Old Tarsh
Old Tarsh is a group of tribes centered on the foothills of
Mount Kero Fin that refuse to acknowledge the Lunar dynasty
of Tarsh, remaining loyal to the Shaker Priestess. Once the core
of the Kingdom of Tarsh, the tribes of Old Tarsh have been
marginalized, and survive by hunting and raiding.
Old Tarshites are poor, but proud and fierce. They view
themselves as the rightful rulers of Tarsh and see Lunar Tarshites
as temporary usurpers. They are notorious for being both
vengeful and indulgent.

Other Principalities
The northeast of Dragon Pass is dominated by the trolls, also
called Uz. Two powerful queendoms, Dagori Inkarth and
Cliffhome, are ruled by Darkness goddesses. That whole region
is called Shadows Dance because of the pools of darkness
that move across the rugged countryside. Trolls once ruled
Dragon Pass and its surrounding lands and wish to return
them to the shadows.
The alien draconic species called dragonewts have strange
settlements throughout Dragon Pass, all connected by a series
of magical roads. Dragon’s Eye is their largest settlement and
home to their ruler, the Inhuman King. They are effectively
immortal, for each time they die they are reincarnated in their
settlement with their memories and experiences intact.
The Dwarf Mine is the entrance to an underground
community of dwarfs, known as Mostali, residing among their
forges and workshops. Rarely seen on the surface world, dwarfs
are the best crafters in the world and possess the secrets of iron.
They trade with humans, although their price is always high.

17

RuneQuest
Beast Valley is home to the Beast People: centaurs,
minotaurs, satyrs, fox women, manticores, ducks, and
others. They are ruled by the demigod Ironhoof who
periodically incarnates among his people to lead them.
Finally, and most significantly, to the north is the
Lunar Empire, currently reeling from the disaster of
the Dragonrise, but still the largest and most powerful
empire in the world. It is ruled by the Red Emperor,
latest in a long-line of wizard-kings responsible only
to their mother, the Red Goddess. The emperor is
immortal in that no natural death can slay them,
although they can be killed. The Red Emperor is
thought to be a single person who has worn many
masks, as it seems that one has ruled for centuries.

M y t h a nd History
Glorantha was created from the Primal Void of
Chaos by its deities. At first, there was no history, for
the initial creation formed the period of magic and
timeless simultaneity called God Time. In God Time,
the entire world was populated with beings and races
of the Golden Age.
The birth into this world of Umath, the Primal
Air, shattered the period of peace, bringing crowding,
confusion, and fear. This escalated into the Gods
War. The universe exploded with strife, and Orlanth
the Storm God used Death to kill the Sun God.
Darkness shrouded the world and creatures from the
Underworld invaded, claiming their place.
At the edge of the world, the Unholy Trio—
Ragnaglar the Mad God, Thed the Mother of the
Broo, and Mallia the Mistress of Disease—let Chaos
loose. All the cosmos was turned upside down, as the
Sun lay dead in Hell and night demons ran amok in
the skies. The herds of Chaos came and devoured
all the food. People and their beasts starved. Oncefriendly spirits of nature—Air and Water, Fire and
Darkness—turned hostile, as each sought to take
a piece of the dying world for themselves. Utter
destruction seemed near.
But Glorantha was not destroyed. Spurred on
by Hope and Chance, the Seven Lightbringers—
Orlanth and his companions Chalana Arroy, Eurmal,
Flesh Man, Ginna Jar, Issaries, and Lhankor Mhy—
traveled through the Chaos-ridden Cosmos and, after
harrowing adventures, liberated the life-giving Sun
God. The joyful god leapt to his rightful place in the
sky and the Dark was banished.

20

Th e Wo r l d o f G l o r a n t h a

The Beginning of History
To keep entropic Chaos from coming to their realm
again, the gods swore great oaths and compacts,
resulting in the Great Compromise. Men call this
Time. By altering the world, the gods saved it, and
history began.
Time began with the Dawn Ages, periods of
peace and growth, as the survivors rebuilt and taught
themselves the way of the world inside Time. The
Elder Races—Aldryami, dragonewts, dwarfs, and
trolls—were as healthy and as proud as humans. In
Dragon Pass, on the continent of Genertela, the
First Council was a balanced organization, including
humans and non-humans, mortals and divinities.
This age of innocence could not last. Ancient feuds
were remembered, and conflicts grew between peoples
outside the Council. Dissent inside and enemies
outside forced the formation of the Second Council,
a warlike empire that grew in arrogance and power
until it dreamed of bringing back the God Time.
The experiment ended in the birth of Gbaji the
Chaos God. His reign of terror kept Glorantha at war
with itself for 50 years. This was the death-knell of the
Elder Races: they have never had the same stature in
the world since. This was the end of the Dawn Ages.

The Empire of the
Wyrms Friends
Out of this shattered world grew new political entities.
Among the most powerful was the state called the
Empire of the Wyrms Friends. Centered in Dragon
Pass, it lasted for 500 years, proud of and famous for
its friendship with the dragons and wyrms of the Pass.
Its peoples and places thrived, contacted two other
continents, and delved deep into spiritual byways.
After 300 years, the traditional rulers were replaced
by a ruling body of men and gods called the Third
Council. Legends relate that there was no telling the
men from the gods in the Council chambers.
But the magic of the Council could not counter
the miseries of its worshipers, nor could they control
the swords of the rebels who did not sacrifice to
them. Foreign gods gained power and prestige as
the provinces of the Third Council revolted or were
overrun by invaders.
At last, the Council turned its energies to defending
its worshipers. Epic battles raged across the land.
Finally, in 1042, after being dormant for centuries, the
dragonewts rose against the Council and slew them all.

21

RuneQuest
Less than a century later, the humans aiding in the
destruction of the empire turned against the dragonewts. With
few allies, the dragonewts seemed helpless before the might
of the Invincible Golden Horde, an alliance of most humans.
Dragonewt nests were scoured with wildfire, planted with seeds
laid by Chaotic parasites, sealed by diseases unnameable, and
cursed by fear and loathing for any that would mourn them.
Heartless and relentless, humans crushed and plundered,
but in 1120 when they closed in upon Dragon Pass, the
assembled human armies met those who would mourn the loss
of dragonewts. Dragons from across Time and Space assembled
in their ancestral home to preserve the purity of their birthplace.
The Dragonkill War got its name from what the dragons did,
not what they suffered. Despite draconic indifference, humans
have feared the dragons since that time. Now none seek to smash
the dragonewts’ eggs, though humans might plunder a nest city.
Dragon Pass was abandoned by humanity. Elsewhere, old
empires shook, and the seas were utterly closed to human
crossing. New kingdoms rose to fill the power vacuums and
new magics and deities broke free from ancient shackles.

The Empire of the Red Moon
Peloria, to the north, is the home of the ancient Dara Happan
civilization founded by Yelm the Sun God in the Golden Age.
After the fall of the Empire of the Wyrms Friends, the cruel
Carmanian Empire conquered Peloria. The Carmanians
threatened to extinguish the last lights of Peloria until seven
desperate heroquesters conspired to revive a dead goddess—the
Red Moon. She was a victim of the Great Darkness, robbed
of immortality and death at the same time, making her unique
among the gods by existing equally in both worlds. The terrible
shock had torn her asunder, scattering her throughout the
worlds. After questing deep into the Underworld along lost
or forbidden paths, she was reformed as the Red Goddess. In
her were balanced Constancy and Change, Life and Death,
Love and Indifference... all the dichotomies of the Universe,
including Chaos. Her arrival in Time changed the face of the
land. The Heartlands of Peloria submitted to the Red Goddess
and overthrew the Carmanian Empire’s rule.
After living in Glorantha a short time, the Red Goddess
ascended to the heavens, where she remains in her cyclical
beauty, viewing the land she left to her family below. The
ever-reincarnating Red Emperor of the Lunar Empire is her
son and her pride. The Lunar Empire expanded from its
founding. When defeated, it rebounded stronger than ever.
The Lunars went north to the icy wastes, east to the bounds
of the horse barbarian lands, and west until they were halted
by the magical Syndics Ban. But in the south, the empire
continued to grow and grow.

22

When the Lunars reached Dragon Pass, they found it
populated again. Moreover, it was dominated by the Kingdom
of Sartar, ruled by a wise dynasty cautiously maintaining
the great and magical laws that gave it its strength. Despite
initial defeats, the Red Emperor eventually marched almost
unhindered into the Sartar capital of Boldhome in 1602. He
defiled the Temple of Sartar and ravaged the city.
So far, it was a typical Lunar conquest.

The Liberation of Sartar
The remnants of the Household of Sartar, however, incited the
natives to rebel against the Lunar Empire. Starbrow’s Rebellion
in 1613 temporarily overthrew the Lunar Occupation. After
the latest rebellion was ruthlessly put down by General Fazzur
Wideread, a puppet Prince was installed in Boldhome.
To extend the Glowline and put an end to the uprisings,
the Lunar College of Magic began to construct a Temple of the
Reaching Moon in the foothills of the Storm Mountains. The
location of this temple would enable the Lunars to vanquish
the rebellious Storm God, winning the Middle Air as the
uncontested domain of the Red Goddess.
Complete Lunar victory seemed imminent after the fall of
Whitewall in 1621. But the final victory never came—rebellions
erupted in Sartar and Heortland, the Lunar Army was routed
in Esrolia by an alliance of rebels and Wolf Pirates, and Pavis
fell to a new warlord called Argrath. Worshipers of the Death
God assassinated the Lunar puppet, Prince Temertain.
As the Lunars gathered to finally consecrate the Temple of
the Reaching Moon in 1625, the Sartarites somehow summoned
a True Dragon immediately beneath the Temple’s foundations.
It devoured the assembled priests and priestesses performing
the dedication ceremony as well as half of the Lunar military
in Dragon Pass. Called the Dragonrise, this catastrophic event
awakened ancient draconic powers and thoughts quiescent
since the Empire of the Wyrms Friends. People and beings
across the world panicked at these terrifying phenomena and
many set into motion their ancient curses, cosmic defenses,
secret plans, and doomsday rituals.
Soon after the Dragonrise, Kallyr Starbow liberated
Boldhome and proclaimed herself Prince of Sartar. The bravery
and glory of Sartar’s fight for independence attracted thousands
of volunteers, and people from all over Glorantha became
adventurers to take their places in its ranks.
Now begins the long-prophesied period known as the
Hero Wars: the fighting around Dragon Pass draws the greatest
collection of Heroes in one place the world has ever seen. In
these pages, adventurers begin their first steps upon the path
to becoming Heroes, to take their places amongst others in
the Hero Wars.

The City of

Jonstown
he city of Jonstown is described here as a
representative settlement in Dragon Pass, located in the
homeland of Sartar (page 16). Adventurers from all over
Dragon Pass are drawn to Jonstown, a haven from danger,
a source of opportunity, as well as a crossroads for adventure.
The year is 1625, the Dragonrise has changed everything.
The Lunar Empire is in full retreat, on the cusp of losing
Dragon Pass entirely. In places like Jonstown the future is
being made, and that future is in the hands of heroes like the
adventurers.

History
The area around Jonstown was settled by several groups
of Orlanthi refugees from the Holy Country around 1400.
These settlers formed clans and later tribes, but soon fought
amongst themselves. The tribes no doubt would have ended
up becoming subjects of some more aggressive power but for
the arrival of Sartar.
Sartar was well versed in secret magic when he came to
Dragon Pass in 1470. He was an unusual person among the
tribes that he approached at that time, for he refused to fight
and, even when challenged, was never seen to raise weapon or
magic offensively against another person. This is not to say that
others did not kill for him, but the people he lived among were
worshipers of the sword, which protected them in their hard lives.
Sartar’s magic stemmed from his eventual mastery of the
Movement Rune, whose attributes are change and growth. He
was a Changer, and through his career as a nation builder
he changed the face of history and the land, as well as more
mundane aspects of life.
His early feats of great magic are interesting and important,
but not spectacular. These all occurred between 1470 and
1485, usually in the lands west of the Quivin Hills. In his first
he broke a tree into water needed for a dying centaur, and

found a small statue of the Earth Goddess, later revered in
the Wild Temple.
His second miracle was when he caused some small, silver
fish from a stream to grow wings and other parts and live in
the air. From more than a foot away they appeared to be insects,
and they served as familiars to Sartar.
Sartar’s third miracle was turning a band of assassins into
termites. The murderers had been bent upon attacking the
sleeping family of the Colymar king. Woodpeckers, sacred to
several Colymar clans, arrived quickly afterwards to dispose
of the pests.
His fourth great deed was to confront Dunorl Toothwinds,
a savage kolating (shaman) in the Sambarri Pass. Their magical
exchanges were great, and the place where they fought is now
avoided by everyone. Sartar finally won by enchanting the
shaman’s Drumbeat of Power into a sweet song carried by a
secret breeze, whose voice led folk to safety. Humiliated, the
shaman retired to Prax.
In 1476 Sartar made the first of his more subtle changes to
the land when he settled a war wherein the southern Kultain
and Locaem Tribes were driving out the Balmyr and Sambarri
Tribes from their ancient lands. Out of such destruction Sartar
forged the foundation of his cities and began changing the
people therein to make a great nation that would bear his name.
The first city was Wilmskirk. Wilms was an old friend of
Sartar, and he designed and supervised construction of the city
around its great open-air temple grounds in the center. Wilms
is still respected as a patron of the artists and craftspeople of
the land of Sartar.
While Sartar consolidated the southern tribes into a single
confederacy, a major war raged among the eastern tribes which
had nearly forced the same sort of unification. Their common
foe was the Telmori Tribe, a werewolf-worshipping nation of
humans who had once venerated the Chaos God Gbaji, and
since then had been wandering the earth without peace.

23

RuneQuest
The wolf-worshipers were powerful. They were in close
communication with wild wolves, and each warrior among
them had an animal which they trained with and cared for, a
relationship commonly called ‘beast brothers.’ They scorned
villages and lived the wandering, hunting life as they were
driven from land to land across the continent.
The Telmori had crossed The Creek sometime around 1460,
driving the Torkani Tribe from their ancestral homes and into
the Indigo Mountains. The Culbrea, Maboder, and Cinsina
tribes also suffered, and all local herdsmen fled from the wolves
and their men, seeking a leader.
The leader they found was a priest of Orlanth named
Hauberk Jon of the Malani Tribe. Hauberk Jon led a daring
raid against the Telmori Tribe, killing their human pack
leader, his family, and his household guards. Jon used magics
of Orlanth and his allies to withstand the wolf powers, but
at great cost to the elite warriors of all the tribes who had
assisted. Jon was busy trying to consolidate the lesser chieftains
when Sartar approached in 1480, offering to make peace with
the Telmori leaders if Jon and his followers would aid him in
making a town afterwards.
Sartar made peace with the Telmori by boldly approaching
their mourning ceremonies. They promised to kill him for
this intrusion, but he spoke kindly in his particular way, and
after he was finished, they agreed to befriend him instead if he
could solve a problem which they set before him: the revival
of their slain chieftain.
Sartar, in his usual way, did not perform what they wanted
but did something else instead which was greater. Sartar produced
a new chief for them. No one had seen the man before, but there
was no doubt he was a Telmori chief. He was called Ostling
Fourwolf, which was a miracle because no one could ever have
more than one beast brother at a time, but Ostling had four!
Ostling also showed the Telmori chiefs some secrets of their
changing and offered hope of their curse being broken. Ostling
passed the leadership tests and so ruled the Telmori afterwards.
He was a good friend to Sartar. From that time the tribe was
always friendly with the rulers of the Sartar dynasty, though they
still mistrusted everyone else as they always had.
After this impressive display of politics and magic the
local tribes agreed to give Sartar’s plan to found a city a try.
Sartar performed the magic of trading script notes for gold
with the Feathered Horse Queen, and showed the kings and
chiefs how they made a profit of cinnamon, red dyes, and
lemon peels for themselves. All five tribes wanted a city of
their own, but Sartar convinced them to work together and in
1480, they made their city. Sartar magically erected the walls
first, and then created the City Ring. It was like the Clan or
Tribal Ring but allowed people from each of the tribes to serve

24

Timeline
1320 – Clearwine settled
1340 – Malani settle around Two-Ridge Farm and the
Arfritha Vale
1370 – Torkani settle in the Guardian Hills
1395 – Cinsina settle around The Creek
1460 – Telmori cross The Creek
1463 – Maboder Tribe founded
1480 – Jonstown founded by Sartar
1486 – Swenstown founded by Sartar
1492 – Sartar acclaimed Prince of Sartar
1495 – Sartar becomes King of Dragon Pass
1497 – Road between Jonstown and Wilmskirk built
1520 – Apotheosis of Sartar
1525 – Jonstown Library founded
1565 – Tarkalor becomes Prince of Sartar
1575 – Tarkalor becomes King of Dragon Pass
1582 – Tarkalor killed at Battle of Grizzly Peak; Far
Point Tribes join Kingdom of Sartar
1602 – Lunar Empire conquers Sartar
1606 – Maboder Tribe destroyed by Telmori
1613 – Starbrow’s Rebellion
1619 – Lunars invade Heortland
1620 – Jomes Wulf defeats the Telmori
1621 – Whitewall falls to Lunars; Great Winter begins
1622 – Culbrea rise in rebellion against the Lunar
Empire; Great Winter ends
1624 – Battle of Pennel Ford in Esrolia; Lunar army
defeated
1625 – Dragonrise; Sartar liberated; Battle of Dangerford;
Kallyr Starbrow proclaimed Prince of Sartar

on it. They were also the candidates to serve in the many new
temples erected in the city. Sartar also instituted the position
of City Rex to represent the Prince in the city’s ring. Hauberk
Jon was the first City Rex, and afterwards the protective spirit
for the city, which was also named Jonstown after him.
The Telmori never joined the city confederation. They
preferred the open hills and woods which Sartar gave to them.
Sartar had also given his word to other tribes, and so borders
were established for the Telmori Hunting Lands. The Telmori
often violated these by hunting in their neighbors’ territory,
but never again took humans or domestic livestock from other
tribes. In fact, the Telmori were never seen outside of their own
territory if they did not wish to be seen.
For more than a century, Jonstown prospered from trade
and pilgrims. Sartar’s royal roads encouraged and facilitated

The City of Jonstown
trade, which greatly enriched the small city. Sartar himself laid
down the foundations of what became the House of Mercy, a
hospital of Chalana Arroy. Pilgrims from across Dragon Pass,
and even beyond, came to the small city with gifts and offerings.
Sartar’s son Eonistaran the Sage built the Jonstown
Library in 1525, and it has become one of the most important
Knowledge Temples in Dragon Pass, home to the famed
Jonstown Compendium (see page 48). At its peak, the Jonstown
Library held many thousands of scrolls, although many were
lost during the Lunar Occupation.
Jonstown surrendered to the Lunar Empire in 1602. In 1606,
the Telmori werewolves attacked and destroyed the Maboder
Tribe. The Lunar captain Jomes Wulf defeated the werewolves
and settled his followers in the former Maboder lands. Except
for a short-lived independence in 1613, the city was under
Lunar rule for the next dozen years. In 1625, the city was
besieged and then successfully assaulted by the Sartar Free
Army. Many Lunars within in the city fled or were slain, their
property pillaged and looted. Parts of the city were burned
before Kallyr Starbrow and other leaders could rein in their
victorious troops.
With the support of Kallyr Starbrow, the Cinsina, Culbrea,
Malani, and Torkani Tribes have formed a free City Ring and
a new City Rex was appointed by the Prince and acclaimed
by the assembled citizens. Jonstown now tries to rebuild and
chart a new destiny as a free city.

Nort her n Sartar

and Lorthing Rivers, which rise in the Quivin Mountains and
merge before entering The Creek. These rivers have carved
fertile valleys out from the surrounding hills. The flow of
these rivers is seasonal; during Storm and Sea Seasons they
are torrents of water, too fast and deep to cross except at a few
fords and bridges; in Earth Season, they become shallow and
gentle, and are easily crossed in many places.
The elevation of the valley is approximately 850 meters
above sea level, although it gains elevation as it approaches the
foothills of the Quivin Mountains.
The surrounding hills rise 50–500 meters above the valley.
During the Gods War, the original limestone and sandstone
rocks were folded into troughs by igneous intrusions of granite
and quartz. The rampaging storm gods eroded much of this,
exposing the granite cores, and leaving a rugged and strikingly
beautiful landscape.

Flora
The lowland valleys are mostly grassland with scattered copses
of oak. Much of the land is under plough, forming patchwork
quilts of small square plots. The farmers grow cereals (mostly
einkorn and barley), and cultivate fruits, including apples,
pears, and plums.
The hills are a combination of oak grasslands and mixed
woods of oak, beech, birch, maple, manzanita, and pine.
Above 900 meters, the oak woodlands give way to stands of
yellow pines, white firs, spruce, and incense cedars. On the
stream banks, bayberries (used for both healing purposes and
candlemaking) grow profusely.

Northern Sartar

Local Tribes

Northern Sartar includes all the human-settled areas between
the Quivin Mountains and the Far Place. The humans are
mostly Sartarites, although there is a small minority of Tarshite
speakers. Sartarite customs are commonly called Orlanthi,
after their main god. Sartarites prefer a tribal organization
with positions of authority and honor filled by merit rather
than inheritance.

The city of Jonstown is the religious, political, and trade center
for a confederation of four (originally six) Sartarite tribes.
Most (but not all) of the citizens of Jonstown are members
of one of these tribal groups. Each tribe provides support and
protection for its members. They have a tribal organization
with positions of authority and honor filled by merit rather
than inheritance. The main tribal god is Orlanth, and the
tribal ruler (Orlanthi make no difference between genders in
such matters) is also the head of the local Orlanth Rex cult.
These tribes have often feuded in the past and many have long
histories of disagreement, although they collectively share in
the governing of the city and its trade.
About 30,000 people belong to these four tribes. Most
live in small hamlets, gatherings of a half-dozen families and
their animals. Such clusters of buildings dot the whole of the
farmed area around Jonstown. Spread among them are some
thirty villages with 100–500 residents each, each the center
for a clan, and there are additionally several larger towns,

Geography
This is a region of rugged hills and plateaus drained by The
Creek and its tributaries. The Creek rises in the volcanic
Indigo Mountains, and flows southwest towards the Upland
Marsh, where it becomes part of The Creek-Stream River (also
called the Dragon River or the Engizi River). From its source
at Skyfall Lake, The Creek-Stream River runs approximately
800 kilometers to its mouth at the city of Nochet.
As The Creek flows through northern Sartar, various
tributaries join it. The most important of these are the Arfritha

25

RuneQuest
each an important tribal center or fortress. These last include
Dangerford, Red Cow, Torkan’s Last Fort, and Two-Ridge Farm,
each with about 500–1,000 residents. The city of Jonstown has
about 2,500 people.

Cinsina Tribe
The largest and most dominant of the tribal groups is the
Cinsina, with 8,800 members. The tribe consists of seven clans:
Blueberry, Dolutha, Frithan, Goodhaven, Greenhaft, Red Cow,
and Underwillow. The warrior-queen of the Cinsina is Ivartha
the Skinner, famed for her campaigns against the werewolves.
Orlanth Thunderous is their tribal patron god.

Culbrea Tribe
The Culbrea is the smallest of the tribal groups with only 5,000
members, having lost much of its territory to the Cinsina
during the Lunar Occupation. It consists of eight small clans:
Barlamani, Elk, Fox, Horned Owl, Lorthing, Mathiording,
Jotoring, and Orlamani. The clan is held in high prestige
despite its size because it controls access to the Hill of Orlanth
Victorious, an important holy place, and because it was the
first tribe to successfully rebel against the Lunar Occupation.
The king of the Culbrea is Ranulf the Good, who led the tribe
to rebellion against the Empire. Orlanth Thunderous is the
tribe’s patron god.

26

Malani Tribe
This powerful tribe of 6,000 members has a fearsome
reputation as warriors. Humakt the God of War is its tribal
patron god. It is comprised of seven clans: Blue Fox, Fish,
Desuring, Isolting, Lysang, Namolding, and Orleving. Despite
its war-like reputation, the Malani clan largely stayed out of the
wars to liberate Sartar, and its influence has declined as a result.
The warrior-queen of the Malani is Amalda Edrufsdaughter.

Torkani Tribe
This tribe of 6,400 members is located near the troll lands of
Dagori Inkarth. Argan Argar, the God of Night, is its patron
god. It is comprised of six clans: Godori, Lissending, Siganti,
Yajnasi, Druyevings, and the Collared Lizard clan. The queen
of the Torkani is Hundara Nightbeam.

Telmori Tribe
The Telmori is a tribe of werewolves, who assume wolf form
during the Full Moon. It is one of the original tribes of Sartar,
despite being tainted by Chaos. It destroyed the Maboder Tribe
in 1606 and has fought against the Cinsina and Culbrea Tribes
in recent years. Most Orlanthi hate and fear the Telmori clan
but accept its right to be in the lands granted to it by Sartar.
The tribe inhabits the nearby Wulfsland, but is not part of the
Jonstown City Ring.

The City of Jonstown

Maboder Tribe
The Maboder was one of the founding tribes of Jonstown
and prospered under during the reign of the House of Sartar.
However, in 1606 the Telmori werewolves fell upon the
Maboder villages, and killed every man, woman, and child they
could find, and destroyed the tribe. When the Lunar general
Jomes Wulf (also called Hostralos) defeated the Telmori, he was
given the former Maboder lands as his own. Wulf fled Sartar
after the Dragonrise, and now the Wulflands are claimed by
the Cinsina, Telmori, Torkani—and by the surviving Maboder.

Villages
Every village differs in detail from the others, but they all have
many things in common. The same commercial activities occur
in each. Each village is a clan center and the headquarters of a
local chief or important noble. The population of these villages
is about 100–500 people each, most of whom farm, but many
of whom also are crafters or the tribe’s mercenaries and retainers.
Every village is surrounded by formidable stone walls, often
further buttressed by clay bricks. Buildings are usually of stone,
mud brick (adobe), wood, or a combination of these materials.
Temples in each village always include Ernalda and Orlanth.
All villages have shrines to other gods or spirits.
Weekly markets are held. On pre-arranged days, all the
local peddlers converge in a village, circulating from village to
village over part or an entire season. Each village includes local
crafters of all the most important types: thatchers, brick makers,
potters, coopers, carpenters, and redsmiths (bronze workers).

Farmers
Most of the population outside the city are farmers. A farmer
is anyone who makes their living by agriculture. The local
techniques typify Genertelan farming of mixed cereals and
animal-tending. Einkorn wheat is the main cereal crop,
augmented by vegetables and common plants like apples, pears,
plums, and herbs. Plowing is done by teams of oxen yoked to
light plows; reaping is done by hand with sickles. Sheep are
herded in the nearby hills for their wool, milk, and meat; cattle
are herded for milk and eaten in religious feasts. Pigs thrive here
and serve as the primary source of meat. Domestic ducks and
geese are common, as is a large cat called an alynx used in herding
and hunting. River fish such as trout and pike are also common.

Royal Road
Jonstown sits along the Royal Road that runs from Alda-Chur
to Boldhome, the main trade artery between the rich Holy
Country in the south and the Lunar Empire in the north. This
architectural masterpiece was built by Prince Sartar to facilitate
trade and ensure rapid communication in his kingdom. The

road is four to five meters wide and rests upon a foundation
of soil and rubble more than a meter deep. The road is paved
with stone blocks.
The Royal Road runs in straight sections and traverses its
way up the steep slopes of the Quivin Mountains to Boldhome.
At regular intervals, it widens to allow shrines and wayside rest
stops. Watchtowers and guard posts are spaced along the road,
although few are occupied given the turmoil in Sartar.

Cit y Descr ip t ion
The City of Jonstown
Jonstown is in the Arfritha Vale along the royal road that runs
from Boldhome to Alda-Chur. It is about 20 kilometers north
of the Quivin Mountains, a high rise of mountains sacred to
the god Orlanth. The city is centered on a rocky outcrop that
rises some 50 meters above the surrounding valley. The Upper
City is built atop the outcrop, with its temples, public buildings,
and monumental architecture. The Lower City is at the base of
the outcrop and gently slopes towards the Royal Road. Most
of the population resides in the Lower City. The entire city is
surrounded by high stone walls.
Jonstown was founded in 1480 when Sartar made the City
Ring and marked out the walls using old magic. This sacred
ceremony, attended by the tribal leaders who established
powerful families in the city, dates the beginning of the building
and settlement. Sartar was noted for his skill at building roads
and walls and was assisted by his dwarf friends. His building
methods were imported from the Holy Country and follow a
city plan called the ‘Jrusteli pattern’ with a central market, a
public and temple complex, and straight main streets.
The area within the walls covers about 25 hectares; the
Upper City covers about nine hectares; the Lower City covers a
little over 15 hectares. By custom and design, the city is divided
into districts called quarters. The quarters are the Upper City,
the Scholar’s Quarter, the Merchant Quarter, and the Crafter’s
Quarter (also called the Library, North, and South Quarters).

Population of Jonstown
The number of people residing within the walls of Jonstown
changes with the season. There are about 2,500 permanent
residents, but winter drives many to take refuge within the city
walls, adding another 500 or so. Of the permanent residents,
around 1,200 are free adults, 800 children, and 500 semi- or
unfree adults. Of the free adults, about 120 are priests and
other nobles, 150 are scribes, 150 healers, and another 330
skilled crafters and merchants. Most other free residents are
mercenaries, laborers, or farmers.

27

28

The City of Jonstown
There are approximately 30,000 tribesmen of Jonstown
outside of the city. They grow most of the food that feeds the city.
A sample resident of Jonstown is provided on page 53 for
use by the gamemaster.

Religions of Jonstown
Most people worship Ernalda and the Lightbringer pantheon.
Ernalda, the earth goddess, is worshiped by women and farmers
throughout the valley, and they often include Orlanth in
her rituals.
The Lightbringers include Orlanth the storm god and
his allies. Although Orlanth is the paramount god, his
companions Chalana Arroy, Eurmal, Issaries, and Lhankor Mhy
all have temples in the city. The hospital temple of Chalana
Arroy and the library temple of Lhankor Mhy are of special
importance to the city.
The Yelmalio cult, with its associated sky gods, is minor in
Jonstown, and initiates must travel several days to Runegate
or the Sun Dome Temple for important ceremonies. Eiritha,
the Cattle Goddess, has a temple near the Meat Market. As
usual, there are several other minor cults, including Daka
Fal and others.
The Lunar cults were represented by the Seven Mothers, a
provincial religion designed to acculture ignorant natives to the
wonders and beauty of the Lunar truth. With the liberation of
the city from Lunar Occupation, the cult has been suppressed
and its temple burned down, but cultists still meet in secret.

Walls, Gates, Towers
Jonstown is surrounded by walls commissioned by Prince Sartar
and built by dwarfs from Dwarf Mine. The walls are made of
ashlar masonry and granite, and stand about six meters high
and four meters wide. The walls bear scars from sieges and
assaults in 1613 and 1625.
There are three gates into the Lower City, each leading to a
market courtyard. Two towers stand beside each of these gates,

and between them extends a strong parapet overlooking the
ground below. From this parapet boiling oil, fire, rocks, arrows,
and spells can all be poured upon enemies at the gate. The
towers are approximately ten meters tall and square.
The gates themselves are about four meters high and four
meters wide, with two doors which can be swung wide open.
They can be closed rapidly and barred with large logs. The
doors are 20 centimeters thick and bound with bronze and iron.
There are additional towers at irregular intervals along the
wall. All but one is 10 meters high. The highest tower, the
Tower of the Winds, stands 20 meters high at the rear of the
Upper City and is used for observation and religious rituals.

Housing
Buildings in Jonstown are generally of one or two stories. They
vary with the income of the residents. The poorest in the city
may sleep eight people to a room, which they share with
chickens, sheep, and pigs. The richest have several voluminous
rooms per individual, with frescoes on the walls and carpets
on the floor. Each household has its shrine to the household
gods and ancestors, to whom an offering is made each morning.
A middle class freeman’s dwelling is a common building.
This house measures from 10–20 meters on a side. If square, a
shape popular among Earth worshipers, 15 meters to a side is
common. Many of the larger buildings are holed, with light
wells in their center.
The bottom floor is divided into three rooms, one of which
is often a shop, rented by a merchant. The central area is a
general cooking and eating room, and it is here that many still
have a fire pit. Such customs quickly disappear when a second
story is added, and fireplaces must be installed. There is also a
part for the servant’s quarters. Furniture depends on taste and
budget. The second story is usually divided into one large room,
often used for entertaining and for more servant sleeping, and
a few smaller ones, usually private rooms for family members
and close household. It is common to have a guest room.
Such a dwelling typically has two fireplaces, one in the
downstairs cooking area and one in the upstairs entertainment
area. Most houses have a ground floor room set aside as a privy.
Food storage is kept far from this room.

Buildings and Styles
Buildings are made of three types of materials: stone, brick, and
wood. The size of most buildings requires rafters to support
the roof or second story. Roofs are tiled, shingled, or thatched.
Building stone of many kinds is available locally. There is a
quarry in the stone hill near the Upper City and the Sartarites
know much about stonemasonry, though not as much as the

29

RuneQuest
dwarfs. About half the buildings in Jonstown are stone, mostly
of granite or limestone.
Brick, made from baked clay or fired adobe, is the next
most popular building material. For instance, the walls of the
Lower City are made of fired brick.
Wood is used in many places and is incorporated even in
stone buildings. However, the density of buildings in Jonstown
mean that fires can easily spread from building to building. As
a result, stone and brick is preferred to wood.

Baths
There are three public baths in Jonstown, the largest being
part of the Chalana Arroy temple complex in the Upper City.
Smaller baths are located within the Uleria Temple near the
Great Market. Another is in the Merchant’s Quarter. All baths
include areas for hot water and steam. The Orlanthi do not
segregate their bathing areas by gender.

Food
The major sources of food are grain and meat from the local
tribes, and fish from the rivers. Grain is normally half to threequarters of the city’s total food requirements for a year. Many
of the same factors which influence grain harvest affect herd
raising and fish stocks, so that all food supplies vary in the same
way. Out of eight average years, food availability is as follows:
one year of acute food shortage or perhaps famine; two years of
some food shortage; two years with sufficient food; two years
of enough food to allow export; and a year of enough food
excess to considerably lower food prices.
The city of Jonstown, recognizing long term fluctuation in
the food supply, purchases and distributes a large percentage
of the city’s food to stymie speculators and maintain
stability. Though this is paid for through taxes and service,
access to nominally free food is a cherished right of the
Jonstown citizenry.

Distribution of Grain
In harvest time, scribes hired by the city travel to market
hamlets and arrange collection and shipping of the grain
levy, along with other supplies. It is then taken by wagon to
Jonstown and stored in the city granaries. The granaries then
grind the grain for a small fee. Many grind their grain in their
homes with quern-stones.
The granaries distribute the einkorn or barley to the citizens,
and sell some to bakers and traders. These latter also may
purchase extra grain directly from the local farmers and make
their own shipping arrangements. Bakers may be simple peddlers
and street vendors, or may own a shop to sell wares, or both.

30

The Cost of Living
Outside of their homes, adventurers must pay their way,
including food, drink, accommodations, and maintenance
of their gear and upkeep for any animals they possess. These
standards of living and relative costs are guides, and can be
adjusted by circumstance or the use of skills or Reputation.
It is assumed that the expenses of repairing broken normal
weapons, replacing lost ammo for bows, etc., are covered
with these sums.
Unless living at home or as guests, the adventurers can
pick their standard of living, paying the suggested amounts
to maintain the described quality of life. Costs are per season
(eight weeks) and can be divided weekly if desired.
Destitute: Costs nothing, but involves sleeping in the
. streets
or wilderness, and providing all of one’s own food.
Repairs to metal weapons and armor are impossible.

Poor: Costs roughly 3 L per season, and likely means
. sleeping
on the floor under a leaky roof in a cold

.
.

shack or hut, minimal and poor-quality food, and
threadbare clothing. Repairs to metal weapons and
armor are not included, nor is replacing lost gear. Both
must be negotiated separately.
Free: Costs roughly 12 L per season, and provides a
clean, comfortable, and secure home with adequate
food with occasional meat or fish, plenty of wine or
beer, and a new suit of clothing at least once per year.
Noble: Costs roughly 40 L per season and represents
a small villa or estate with ample servants, plenty of
food and the ability to entertain guests as desired,
with fine clothing suitable for a variety of occasions.

Beyond this is the province of petty kings or queens, and
varies wildly based on the location, the amenities desired,
and the relative degree of security required to uphold
the household.
More detailed information about these matters can be
found within the RuneQuest core rules.

Distribution of Meat
Meat is purchased from the local clans. When clan herders come
to Jonstown to sell their stock of cattle and sheep, their leaders
first go to the North Market (also called the Meat Market, page
51). There are many buyers there, either in booths or in offices
about the square. The clans may have sales prearranged or may
sound out several traders before striking a bargain. The buyers
may be traders or temples. Once the deal is closed, an agent of
the buyer(s) accompanies the clan leaders back to the herds and
guides them to corrals outside of the city. The agent prepares
a voucher for the clan; a city scribe approves the transfer and
marks out the animals for the city tax. The clan can take their
voucher back to the Issaries temple and cash it in for goods,
money, or training.
When the animals are ready to be killed, they are either
taken to the temple for sacrifice, or are taken to the North
Market, where the animals are killed, cured, etc. There it is
delivered to butchers and other retailers who prepare it for

The City of Jonstown
consumption. The other retailers may, for instance, run a food
stand, peddle by foot, or even own an inn or tavern.
City-owned meat travels to the food centers located near
the granaries, and citizens may pick up their allotments there.
Much of it is smoked or jerked or otherwise prepared for long
storage. On the days when meat is sold, a fair crowd can be
seen gathering about the meat sellers early in the morning.

Distribution of Fish
Fish eaten in Jonstown come from the length of The CreekStream River, although little is shipped far if not preserved.
Some fishy delicacies come from as far away as the Mirrorsea
Bay and are preserved in oil and salt, then boated or carted
upstream. Generally, fish is brought to the North Market at
dawn or late afternoon, where it is weighed and graded. A
voucher is issued there, verified by a scribe, and cash is paid.
Tax collectors keep records of all sales and tax the fishermen
a fee payable in dried fish. This is collected every four
weeks. Fishermen naturally preserve the worst part of their
catch to pay this.
Fishermen near Jonstown sell fresh fish to individuals
and retailers, and what cannot be sold is dried. The scattered
fishermen living at a distance from the city mostly bring
in dried fish. Dried fish is stored by the city as part of the
emergency food stocks.

Cit y Polit ics
Citizenship
Citizenship in the city of Jonstown is like clan membership.
Eligibility extends to all members of tribes of the Jonstown
Confederation who choose to live in the city, to the priests
of the temples, and to full members of a guild. Citizenship is
coveted and conveys great prestige to the individual. There are
approximately 1,000 actual citizens of Jonstown.
Citizenship is not automatic; it must be requested. A
citizen must be at least a lay member of Orlanth, own the
land on which they live, have income, pay taxes to the city,
reside in Jonstown, and bear arms (if able) to defend the city.
Interpretation of these rules is determined by the City Ring.
If a current citizen fails to meet the above qualifications, they
can be stripped of their rights.
Citizens have the right to speak at the seasonal assembly,
obtain justice from the City Ring, respectful protection by the
city guard, the right to become a guild member, and the right
to a portion of the city food supplies.
Each season, the citizens assemble in the Upper City to
deliberate and approve measures proposed by the City Ring.

City Government
The city is governed by a council, called the City Ring. The
kings of the tribes of the confederation and the High Priests
of the leading temples appoint the thirteen members of the
council, each enjoying the status and privilege of a noble. The
primary responsibilities of the Jonstown Ring are the city
economy and resolving disputes between the tribes.
The City Ring appoints judges to resolve legal disputes,
levies taxes, controls distribution of food and other communal
property, delegates temporary authority, keeps peace within the
walls, schedules stone house building, organizes celebrations,
keeps the streets clear, and enters into treaties and contracts.
The council’s most important religious function is making
sacrifices to the wyter of the city, Hauberk Jon.
The City Rex is head of the City Ring. The Prince
nominates the City Rex, who must be acclaimed by the
assembled citizens. The City Rex leads the city militia, appoints
scribes (from amongst the Free Sages), and oversees city funds.
Shortly after the city’s liberation in Earth Season 1625,
Orngerin Holdfast, Kallyr’s representative on the City Ring, was
elected City Rex. He is aided by his fellow City Ring member,
Jorjera Latish, who serves as an unofficial city administrator.
She oversees the scribes and their work, which includes tax
records, food payments, and so on.

City Guard
The city supports a permanent force of 50 trained and
experienced mercenaries to serve as a city guard. They report
to the City Rex and serve as his bodyguards, guard the city gates,
enforce the laws of the city, and act as cadres for a mobile force
protecting the local farmers. Another 40 part-time deputies can
be quickly mobilized. Being a guardsman is a position of high
status and the ransom for a guardsman is 1,000 L.
At any time, there are no more than twenty guards patrolling
the walls and the streets, and another 30 more in reserve. The
city guard wear an open helmet, bronze cuirass, greaves, and
vambraces, and are armed with swords, javelins, and a medium
shield. They wear a distinctive feather crest on their helmet to
display their status.
A sample city guard is provided on page 54 for the
gamemaster’s convenience.

Militia
The city can quickly muster a militia of about 500 able-bodied
fighters, under the command of the City Rex. Within a few
days, the city can muster another 2,500 militia from the local
tribes. The militia are expected to be armed with at least a
“shield, a spear, and a strong hat.” Given the recent wars, much
of the militia is comprised of veteran fighters, usually equipped

31

RuneQuest
with a sword, a helmet, and usually some metal armor (much
taken from the defeated Lunar Army).
A sample militia member is provided on page 54.

Guilds
The merchants of Jonstown determine all prices in the city.
Their opinions carry weight and can prevail against public
opinion or real need, sometimes causing suffering and bad
blood. Each trade is organized into a guild or association,
which has religious undertones as well. Thus, there are the
Merchants Guild, Bakers Guild, Cloth and Leather Workers
Guild, Parchment Makers Guild, Potters Guild, Redsmith
Guild, Stonecutters Guild, etc.
Each guild has a monopoly on its specific trade—a crafter
or merchant must become a member of the guild to practice
the trade. To become a guild member is the same process as
becoming a lay member of the guild’s patron deity; in addition,
the candidate must swear loyalty to the guild and pays an
annual “contribution” to the guild’s communal funds. In return,
the guild protects its members and furthers their livelihood.
The guild is treated as an independent body by Orlanthi
law—it can own property, initiate legal action, enter contracts,
etc. Each guild is governed by its members, who appoint leaders,
approve guild regulations, etc.
The guilds act in concert whenever the economic stability of
the city is threatened. If only a portion of the financial stability
is threatened, the guilds act appropriately.
Portions of the guilds are controlled by the major
families of the city and other portions by families seeking to
become important.

Free Sages
The most powerful ‘guild’ in Jonstown is made up of the
initiates and priests of Lhankor Mhy, a group called the Free
Sages. There are about 150 scribes in the city. They are free to
sell their services as scribes, teachers, and scholars to whoever
meets their price—tribes, temples, merchants, nobles, warlords,
etc. The city government relies upon them to record decisions,
decrees, and other official information.
The Free Sages are an important source of commerce for the
rest of the city. The Parchment Makers purchase large numbers
of animal skins which must be scraped, treated, stretched, and
treated again before they can be cut and sold to the Free Sages
as parchment. Other merchants provide the ingredients for ink.
The presence of so many scribes has strongly influenced the
culture of Jonstown. Most citizens are at least semi-literate, and
philosophical arguments are surprisingly common.
A sample Free Sage is provided on page 55 for use by
the gamemaster.

32

Thieves
The thieves of Jonstown are mainly footpads that concentrate
on strong-arm robbery, burglary, picking pockets, and cutting
purses. Outside the city, there are bandit gangs that act as
highwaymen; however, most caravans are well-armed. Con
games and rigged games of chance are rife in the town.
Beyond the freelance thieves, who are often caught, there
is a Lanbril-connected thief ring called the Night Stalkers.
They commit robberies and burglaries together, since acting
alone is less lucrative than operating with the support of the
companions. The loot is divided by the whole gang, and every
member takes an active part in the criminal operation. As the
name suggests, the Night Stalkers operate at night, when the
thieves can operate undisturbed in the darkness. They also
run a protection racket in the Scholar’s and Crafter’s Quarters.
See page 56 for a generic thief non-player character.

Lunars in Jonstown
Until recently, Jonstown was occupied by the Lunar Army.
Lightly garrisoned prior to Starbrow’s Rebellion, Jonstown
was later the headquarters for five Lunar regiments. A barracks
was built in the Upper City next to the Seven Mothers temple.
Many Lunars settled in the city, and at its peak about a third
of the city’s population was Lunar.
When the city was liberated by the Sartar Free Army
in Earth Season 1625, much of the Lunar population fled
or was killed or enslaved by the victorious Sartarites. The
Seven Mothers temple and imperial barracks were pillaged
and destroyed. Some Lunars managed to buy their freedom or
were ransomed by friendly tribes. Perhaps 100 Lunars remain
in the city, mostly in the Crafter’s Quarter. Many others are
under the protection of the Chalana Arroy temple. There is
rumored to be an Irrippi Ontor ring operating within the
Knowledge Temple.

Pow er f ul People
City Government
The City Ring governs Jonstown and resolves disputes between
the tribes. The kings of the tribes of the confederation and
the High Priests of the leading temples appoint the thirteen
members of the council, each enjoying the status and
privilege of a noble.

The City of Jonstown

Orngerin Holdfast
Wind Lord of Orlanth Rex. Male, age 47.
City Rex of Jonstown.

STR CON
17
18
Attacks

SIZ
14

Weapon
Composite Bow
1H Spear*
Broadsword
Medium Shield
Spirit Combat

%
85
125
115
120
75

DEX
18

INT
16

Damage
1D8+1
1D6+1+1D4
1D8+1+1D4
NA
1D6+3

POW CHA
17
18
SR
S/MR
5
5
6
12

Pts
7
15
12
12
—

* Iron-headed, does double damage against elves and trolls.

Orngerin Holdfast

Orngerin Holdfast, City Rex of Jonstown
A Wind Lord of Orlanth, Orngerin is the chief lieutenant and
captain of Kallyr Starbrow, having fought at her side for a dozen
years. He is Kallyr’s representative in Jonstown and was elected
City Rex by the citizens. As City Rex, Orngerin is tasked with
defending the city and keeping the peace. He is a skilled warrior
and an expert at guerilla warfare; however, as a politician he
is rough and often undiplomatic—he serves as City Rex only
out of loyalty to Kallyr.
Orngerin’s primary concern is the current military weakness
of Sartar—he seeks to forge the local tribes into a unified army
that can defend the area from a resurgent Lunar Army. He
dislikes Erryn Mercy and has little patience for the endless
debates of scribes and merchants.
The city guard serve as Orngerin’s bodyguard and are
commanded by Javern Spithorn, who has served Orngerin as
long as he has served Kallyr.

A llied and Bound Spirits
Allied Spirit (bound in Orngerin’s spear): POW 14 CHA 15; Spirit
Magic: Detect Trap (2), Glamour (2).
Bound Spirit (alynx): POW 13 CHA 11; Spirit Magic: Countermagic 4, Lightwall (4).
Bound Spirit (spotted owl): POW 13 CHA 8; Spirit Magic: Farsee
(2), Glue (3).
Bound Spirit (rat): POW 11 CHA 6; Spirit Magic: Ironhand 4,
Strength (2).
Bound Spirit (green lizard): POW 9 CHA 12; Spirit Magic: Firearrow (2), Fireblade (4). See page 54 of Book 1: Rules for more
information about bound spirits.

Hit Locations

Attributes

Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

Quality
Value
Hit Points
20
Move
8
Strike Rank 3 (DEX 1 SIZ 2)
Rune Points
15
Magic Points
89

D20 AP/HP
01–04
9/7
05–08
9/7
09–11
9/7
12
9/8
13–15
9/6
16–18
9/6
19–20
6/7

Runes: Air 95%, Earth 70%, Movement 95%, Spirit 60%, Truth 75%.
Cults: Orlanth Rex
Rune Spells: All common Rune spells, plus Ban (1 or 3), Bless
Woad 1+, Dark Walk (1), Dismiss Air Elemental (1–2), Earth Shield
(3), Flight 1+, Leap 1+, Lightning 1+, Magic Point Enchantment 1+,
Matrix Creation 1+, Mist Cloud 1+, Shield 1+, Spirit Armor Enchantment 1+, Summon Air Elemental (1–2), Wind Words (1).
Spirit Magic: Bladesharp 6, Demoralize (2), Disruption (1), Heal 6,
Protection 3.
Magic Points: 89 (17 + 60 in allied and bound spirits + 12 in POW
storage crystal).
Passions: Devotion (Orlanth) 80%, Fear (Lunar Hell) 80%, Hate
(Lunar Empire) 85%, Honor 75%, Loyalty (Greenhaft Clan) 60%,
Loyalty (Kallyr Starbrow) 95%, Loyalty (Sartar) 85%.
Reputation: 65%
Armor: Full suit of enchanted iron plate armor, iron open helm
(–50% to Move Quietly, no penalty to spellcasting).
Skills: Bargain 40%, Battle 60%, Bureaucracy 60%, Charm
50%, Climb 90%, Conceal 50%, Cult Lore (Orlanth Rex) 55%,
Customs (Sartar) 60%, Dance 50%, Dodge 95%, Farm 55%, Fast
Talk 40%, First Aid 60%, Homeland Lore (Sartar) 60%, Insight
(humans) 55%, Intimidate 55%, Intrigue 40%, Jump 100%, Listen
70%, Meditate 45%, Move Quietly 45%, Orate 60%, Ride (horse)
65%, Scan 90%, Search 60%, Sing 65%, Sleight 50%, Survival
70%, Worship (Orlanth) 90%.
Languages: Speak Heortling 75%, Speak New Pelorian 35%, Speak
Stormspeech 55%, Speak Tradetalk 45%, Read/Write Theyalan 40%.
Magic Items: Enchanted iron armor that absorbs 5 points of magic
point damage in spirit combat; iron-bound spear (does double
damage against elves and trolls if it does damage after armor is
subtracted); 12-point POW storage crystal. He may have other magic
items at the gamemaster’s discretion.
Ransom: 5,000 L

33

RuneQuest

Jorjera Latish, City Administrator
Aristocratic, commanding, and beautiful, Lhankor Mhy
Sage Jorjera comes from New Pavis where her father is Chief
Librarian. She is a talented bureaucrat with a remarkable knack
for finding the right scroll. Her knowledge of old clan and
tribal disputes is second to none in the library.
Ambitious and a skilled politician, Jorjera serves as Chief of
Loremasters. She serves on the City Ring as the representative of
Lhankor Mhy. It is said that while Orngerin Holdfast is Kallyr’s
representative, it is Jorjera Latish who truly runs the town.
She serves unofficially as the City Administrator, overseeing
the work of the scribes in the city’s service. Thus, she brings
immense experience in bureaucracy and civil management to
bear in keeping Jonstown running.
Jorjera seeks to succeed Garangian Bronze-Guts as Chief
Librarian and strives to increase the role that the Knowledge
Temple plays in administering the city. She can be a stickler
for rules when they serve her interest.

Jorjera Latish

34

Jorjera L atish
Jonstown City Administrator. Female, age 28. New Pavis.
Sage of Lhankor Mhy, Chief of Loremasters.

STR CON
10
8
Attacks

SIZ
9

Weapon
Spirit Combat

%
45

DEX
14

INT
18

POW CHA
12
15

Damage
1D6+1

SR
12

Pts
—

Hit Locations

Attributes

Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

Quality
Value
Hit Points
8
Move
8
Strike Rank 4 (DEX 2 SIZ 2)
Rune Points
6
Magic Points
25

D20 AP/HP
01–04
0/3
05–08
0/3
09–11
0/3
12
0/4
13–15
0/2
16–18
0/2
19–20
0/3

Runes: Earth 75%, Fire/Sky 40%, Man 80%, Stasis 75%, Truth 90%.
Cults: Lhankor Mhy
Rune Spells: All common Rune spells, plus Clairvoyance (2)
Knowledge (2), Reconstruction (3), Translate (1), Truespeak (2),
Wind Words (1).
Spirit Magic: Detect Magic (1), Heal 3, Lantern (1), Repair 2.
Sorcery: Has mastered the Command technique and the Spirit and
Truth Runes.
Sorcery Spells: Identify Otherworld Entity (3) 60%, Reveal Rune
(2) 60%, Solace of the Logical Mind (2) 50%.
Magic Points: 25 (12 + 13 in POW storage crystal)
Passions: Hate (Animal Nomads) 60%, Love (Knowledge) 80%,
Loyalty (Jonstown Knowledge Temple) 75%, Loyalty (New Pavis
Knowledge Temple) 60%.
Reputation: 24%
Armor: None
Skills: Bargain 40%, Bureaucracy 90%, Charm 35%, Climb 45%,
Cult Lore (Lhankor Mhy) 55%, Customs (New Pavis) 60%,
Customs (Sartar) 80%, Dodge 45%, Elder Race Lore (Uz) 35%,
Evaluate 45%, Homeland Lore (Dagori Inkarth) 30%, Homeland
Lore (New Pavis) 80%, Homeland Lore (Sartar) 75%, Insight
(humans) 75%, Intrigue 60%, Jump 55%, Library Use 90%,
Listen 40%, Lore (Cartography) 90%, Meditate 80%, Mineral
Lore 25%, Ride (zebra) 25%, Scan 40%, Search 30%, Sing 45%,
Worship (Lhankor Mhy) 65%.
Languages: Speak Darktongue 35%, Speak Heortling 95%, Speak
Tradetalk 75%, Read/Write Darktongue 15%, Read/Write New
Pelorian 75%, Read/Write Theyalan 90%.
Magic Items: Magnifying lens with a Farsee 1 matrix; POW storage
crystal (13 magic points); Heal 6 potion.
Ransom: 1,000 L

The City of Jonstown

Chalana Arroy Temple Group

Erryn Mercy

Sister Erynn Mercy is the High Priestess of the healing goddess.
She is an old woman, and no one dares to dislike her for fear
she withholds her blessings when they need them. Her word
is much respected, but some people resent her passive ways
and try to ignore her. She is used to this and is very patient,
often proving to be the final and most reasonable voice heard.
Erryn Mercy was in the Sartar High Council in both 1613
and 1624, and now serves in the City Ring. Despite her status,
she works alongside all her temple healers. She often does
rounds within the city, healing and counseling any who need it.

A llied and Bound Spirits
Allied Spirit (bound in white dove): POW 15 CHA 18; Spirit Magic:
Countermagic 4, Detect Life (1), Detect Undead (1), Distraction
(1), Extinguish 4, Second Sight (3), Shimmer 3, Silence (1).

Erryn Mercy

Erryn M ercy
High Priestess of Chalana Arroy at the Jonstown Temple.
Female, age 72.

STR CON
8
10
Attacks

SIZ
10

Weapon
Spirit Combat

%
70

DEX
16

INT
17

POW CHA
18
16

Damage
1D6+3

SR
12

Pts
—

Hit Locations

Attributes

Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

Quality
Value
Hit Points
11
Move
8
Strike Rank 3 (DEX 1 SIZ 2)
Rune Points
11
Magic Points
58

D20 AP/HP
01–04
0/4
05–08
0/4
09–11
0/4
12
0/5
13–15
0/3
16–18
0/3
19–20
0/4

Runes: Earth 80%, Fertility 95%, Fire/Sky 20%, Harmony 95%,
Man 75%, Water 40%.
Cults: Chalana Arroy
Rune Spells: All common Rune spells (except Warding), plus Comfort
Song (1), Cure All Disease (2), Cure Chaos Wound (1), Cure Poison
(1), Harmony 1+, Heal Body (3), Healing Trance (1), Regrow Limb (2),
Restore Health 1+, Resurrect (3), Summon Healing Spirit (1–3).
Spirit Magic: Befuddle (2), Dullblade 3, Heal 6, Light (1), Sleep (3).
Sorcery: Has mastered the Command technique and the Fertility
Rune.
Sorcery Spells: Accelerate Healing (2) 90%, Protective Circle (2) 60%
Magic Points: 58 (18 + 15 in allied spirit + 25 in crystals)
Passions: Devotion (Chalana Arroy) 90%, Love (Balance) 90%,
Loyalty (Sartar) 70%
Reputation: 70%
Armor: None
Skills: Act 40%, Alchemy 60%, Art 40%, Bargain 50%, Bureaucracy 40%, Charm 50%, Climb 75%, Conceal 45%, Cult Lore
(Chalana Arroy) 95%, Customs (Sartar) 50%, Dance 50%, Devise
55%, Dodge 80%, Evaluate 55%, Farm 55%, First Aid 95%, Hide
40%, Homeland Lore (Sartar) 70%, Insight (humans) 75%, Intimidate 55%, Intrigue 45%, Jump 85%, Listen 75%, Meditate 80%,
Move Quietly 40%, Orate 70%, Plant Lore 85%, Play Instrument
(harp) 75%, Ride (horse) 45%, Scan 65%, Search 75%, Sing 55%,
Sleight 45%, Survival 55%, Track 55%, Treat Disease 100%, Treat
Poison 90%, Worship (Chalana Arroy) 90%
Languages: Speak Heortling 85%, Speak New Pelorian 50%, Speak
Tradetalk 55%, Read/Write Theyalan 85%
Magic Items: Two POW storage crystals (one for 13 magic points,
one for 12); three gas POT 18 antidotes; three mineral POT 18
antidotes; three spider POT 18 antidotes. In addition to these she
has a vast array of other antidotes and minor magic items relating
to healing at the temple.
Ransom: 2,500 L

35

RuneQuest

Issaries Temple Group
Joh Mith

Joh is rather plump, with a cheerful smile, friendly winks, and
a good word. With his dark troll bodyguard, Joh Mith cuts
an exotic figure. Popular, he was recently elected Issaries High
Priest, and he serves on the City Ring, where his main priority
is trying to maintain price balances for stable profits.
A famous long-distance trader and Goldentongue priest,
until recently Joh Mith led an annual caravan over the
Rockwood Mountains, returning with exotic furs, spices, and
feathers; occasionally even goods of dwarf manufacture. He
knows one of the few passes over the Rockwood Mountains
into Balazar, and is an expert on the lands of Balazar and even
the Elder Wilds. One secret that Joh Mith keeps is the existence
of a giant merchant’s castle in the far-off mountains to the east.
Joh is married to Zix Porub, a lean and mirthless Issaries
cultist from the city of New Pavis. He has two adult children:
his eldest son Djimm Mith, who now leads his caravan to
Balazar; and his daughter Thinelda Mith, who is married to
Jorator of Clearwine.

A llied and Bound Spirits
Allied Spirit (bound in staff ): POW 18 CHA 12; Spirit Magic:
Befuddle (2), Bludgeon 4, Detect Magic (1), Dispel Magic (2),
Glue 2, Lantern (1)

36

Joh Mith

Joh Mith
Issaries Goldentongue priest. Male, 48 years old. Malani Tribe

STR CON
13
15
Attacks

SIZ
15

Weapon
Spirit Combat

%
70

DEX
14

INT
15

POW CHA
18
17

Damage
1D6+3

SR
12

Pts
—

Hit Locations

Attributes

Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

Quality
Value
Hit Points
17
Move
8
Strike Rank 3 (DEX 2 SIZ 1)
Rune Points
12
Magic Points
47

D20 AP/HP
01–04
0/6
05–08
0/6
09–11
0/6
12
0/7
13–15
0/5
16–18
0/5
19–20
10/6

Runes: Air 70%, Darkness 40%, Earth 20%, Harmony 80%,
Movement 85%, Truth 60%.
Cults: Issaries Goldentongue
Rune Spells: All common Rune spells, plus Analyze Magic (1),
Ban (1 or 3), Binding Enchantment 1+, Create Market 3+, Lock
1+, Magic Point Enchantment 1+, Matrix Creation 1+, Passage 1+,
Path Watch (2), Regrow Limb (2), Spell Trading 2+, Spirit Armor
Enchantment 1+.
Spirit Magic: Countermagic 2, Heal 6, Mobility (1), Protection 4.
Magic Points: 47 (18 + 18 in allied spirit + 11 in POW storage crystal)
Passions: Devotion (Issaries) 70%, Love (Family) 80%, Loyalty
(Sartar) 75%.
Reputation: 46%
Armor: None
Skills: Alchemy 20%, Animal Lore 25%, Bargain 105%, Charm 45%,
Conceal 40%, Cult Lore (Issaries Goldentongue) 90%, Customs
(Balazar) 65%, Customs (Sartar) 55%, Customs (Pavis) 45%, Dance
45%, Devise 50%, Disguise 35%, Dodge 60%, Elder Race Lore
(Mostali) 25%, Elder Race Lore (Uz) 35%, Evaluate 95%, Fast Talk
35%, First Aid 55%, Hide 30%, Homeland Lore (Balazar) 70%,
Homeland Lore (Sartar) 70%, Insight (humans) 65%, Intimidate
50%, Intrigue 45%, Listen 70%, Manage Household 50%, Meditate
60%, Move Quietly 30%, Orate 75%, Play Instrument (mouth
harp) 50%, Ride (horse) 75%, Scan 70%, Search 60%, Sing 60%,
Survival 50%, Track 40%, Worship (Issaries) 90%.
Languages: Speak Aldryami 35%, Speak Balazaring 80%, Speak
Darktongue 60%, Speak Firespeech 55%, Speak Heortling 85%,
Speak Tradetalk 105%, Read/Write Darktongue 30%, Read/Write
Theyalan 90%.
Magic Items: 3-point spell reinforcing crystal; 11-point POW
storage crystal; an enchanted hat which serves as 10-point armor
(head hit location) and absorbs 6 points of magic point damage in
spirit combat.
Ransom: 1,000 L

The City of Jonstown

Darvast and Darningle Hornos

Lyserian Goodspeech

Issaries, Malani Tribe.
The wealthy Hornos brothers are called “the Exchangers.” The
Hornos brothers arrange deals between merchants, helping
buyers find sellers. Both are priests of the Issaries subcult of
Garzeen. The elder brother, Darvast, is a born dealmaker
who excels at bringing parties together (always in exchange
for a small piece of the action). Darvast served as the Issaries
High Priest until the liberation of the city, after which he was
replaced by Joh Mith.
Darningle Lackhand is the younger brother, and in contrast
to his brother he is a quiet and withdrawn man. Superb at
calculating risks, costs, and potential benefits, Darningle
serves as a money lender and invests in many business ventures
(including some remarkably unlikely ones). Rumors persist
of how he lost his left hand which, despite his generous
contributions to the House of Peace, cannot be regrown.

Issaries, Malani Tribe.
Lyserian opposed Starbrow’s Rebellion and was appointed City
Rex after the rebellion was defeated. Lyserian worked to ensure
Jonstown’s safety through cooperation and negotiation with the
occupying forces. When the city was liberated from the Lunar
Occupation, the warlords of the Sartar Free Army sought to
exile Lyserian as a collaborator, but his tribe intervened and
protected him.

Darvast Hornos
Darningle Hornos
Lyserian Goodspeech

37

RuneQuest

Lhankor Mhy Temple Group
Garangian Bronze-Guts

Originally hailing from Nochet, Garangian is the High Priest
and Chief Librarian. He has resided in the library for almost
50 years. He is an old man now, balding and with a long grey
beard. Garangian is a scholar’s scholar, writing books and
commentary about other books. Garangian has written so many
books and commentaries over the years that he is occasionally
incapable of remembering what he wrote previously and ends
up contradicting himself. His most famous work is his 120volume Compendium of Persons Eminent in Every Branch of
Learning with a List of their Writings.
Garangian relies upon Jorjera for handling administrative
duties, perhaps unaware of her growing ambition to assume
his position within the temple. He has a weakness for sweets,
and regularly frequents the city’s markets with an eye out for
some new morsel or treat.

A llied and Bound Spirits
Bound Spirit (bound in silver fillet): POW 17 CHA 17; Spirit
Magic: Countermagic 2, Dispel Magic 3, Light (1), Protection 3,
Second Sight (3), Visibility (2).
Invisible Cat: No one else seems to notice it, but it is always getting
underfoot and tripping Garangian.

38

Garangian Bronze-Guts

G arangian Bronze-Guts
High Priest and Chief Librarian. Male, age 74. Nochet.

STR CON
7
8
Attacks

SIZ
10

Weapon
Spirit Combat

%
70

DEX
11

INT
15

POW CHA
18
10

Damage
1D6+3

SR
12

Pts
—

Hit Locations

Attributes

Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

Quality
Value
Hit Points
9
Move
8
Strike Rank 5 (DEX 3 SIZ 1)
Rune Points
10
Magic Points
46

D20 AP/HP
01–04
0/3
05–08
0/3
09–11
0/3
12
0/4
13–15
0/2
16–18
0/2
19–20
0/3

Runes: Earth 75%, Man 75%, Moon 30%, Stasis 95%, Truth 90%,
Water 40%.
Cults: Lhankor Mhy
Rune Spells: All common Rune spells, plus Analyze Magic (1),
Clairvoyance (2), Create Market 3+, Find Paper (1), Knowledge (2),
Reconstruction (3), Restore Health 1+, Translate (1), Truespeak (2),
Wind Words (1).
Spirit Magic: Detect Magic (1), Detect Paper (1), Detect Trap (2),
Distraction (1), Dullblade 4, Repair 1.
Sorcery: Has mastered the Command and Summon techniques and
the Earth and Truth Runes.
Sorcery Spells: Geomancy (3) 75%, Logician (2) 70%
Magic Points: 46 (18 + 28 in bracelet storage crystals)
Passions: Gluttony 80%, Loyalty (Jonstown Knowledge Temple) 80%,
Vanity 75%.
Reputation: 34%
Armor: None
Skills: Art 35%, Bargain 65%, Bureaucracy 35%, Conceal 35%,
Craft (baking) 60%, Cult Lore (Lhankor Mhy) 95%, Customs
(Esrolia) 50%, Customs (Sartar) 60%, Devise 45%, Dodge 60%,
Evaluate 70%, First Aid 60%, Hide 30%, Homeland Lore (Esrolia)
70%, Homeland Lore (Sartar) 80%, Insight (humans) 65%,
Library Use 120%, Listen 70%, Meditate 50%, Move Quietly 35%,
Orate 35%, Play Instrument (sistrum) 50%, Ride (horse) 35%,
Scan 70%, Search 60%, Sing 40%, Sleight 35%, Survival 45%,
Track 40%, Troll Lore 50%, Worship (Lhankor Mhy) 90%.
Languages: Speak Esrolian 95%, Speak Heortling 95%, Speak Tradetalk 65%, Read/Write New Pelorian 50%, Read/Write Western 45%,
Read/Write Theyalan 95%.
Magic Items: An ancient Esrolian sistrum that adds +20% to Play
Instrument when used; a bracelet of five linked crystals that store
a total of 28 magic points; writing implements and four uses of
enchanted ink that adds +20% to Read/Write language skills;
monocle with a permanent 1-pt. Farsee spell matrix; other items as
needed, as he has access to the vast library archives.
Ransom: 2,500 L

The City of Jonstown

Aranastaya

Krisgrin Many-Tongue

Lhankor Mhy, no tribe.
Originally from Esrolia, Aranastaya is a Priestess of Lhankor
Mhy and the Provost of Apprentices. She is a strict disciplinarian
but cares greatly about her apprentices.

Lhankor Mhy, no tribe.
Krisgrin is a nandan Sage of Lhankor Mhy, best known for
their treatise on geometry. They are a specialist in Jrusteli and
Mostali lore and script.

Garstal Shavetop

Mata Min

Lhankor Mhy, Culbrea Tribe.
Garstal is Priest of the Knowing God and a master of draconic lore.
Fluent in the Auld Wyrmish script of the Empire of the Wyrms
Friends, Garstal is familiar with the intricacies and enigmas of
draconic philosophy and has even traveled within the Dragon’s
Eye. Garstal has studied both dragonewts and dragonkind.

Lhankor Mhy, Cinsina Tribe.
Mata Min is the Chief Priestess of the Jonstown Library,
and is in charge of all magical training, including spirit and
Rune magic, and sorcery, and also administers the temple’s
service of evaluating treasures, for which she collects a
percentage of the fees.

Kalf the Maker

Poroniel Wolf-Netter

Lhankor Mhy, Vantaros Tribe.
Kalf Ashartsson is the Jonstown Temple’s master of the
alchemical arts, steeped in the sorcerous lore of the Mostali. He
holds the Dwarf of Dwarf Run in high regard and has met with
him on occasion. Despite this regard, Kalf ’s greatest ambition
is to steal the secrets of the dwarf ’s alchemical transformer for
his temple. His room in the library is filled with glass vessels,
tripods, crucibles, and open flames. Kalf is usually clad in a
leather apron, thick gloves, and obsidian goggles.

Lhankor Mhy, Cinsina Tribe.
Poroniel is a Sage from Red Cow who is an expert on animal
taxonomy. He earned his nickname when he hired adventurers
to capture several Telmori Wolfbrothers and their associated
dire wolves to study.

Vala the Undying
Lhankor Mhy, Culbrea Tribe.
Vala is the most devoted sage of the Jonstown Library, who
swore an oath to maintain the Jonstown Compendium until it
is complete. She performed her task admirably, and when her
body died, her spirit refused to leave her body so long as the
Compendium remained incomplete. Vala remains at the high
scribe’s table, working endlessly towards that goal.

Orlanth Temple Group

Bardrinor Red Cow

Orlanth Thunderous, thane of the Cinsina Tribe.
The son of a Cinsina chieftain, Bardrinor is the half-brother of
Ernalsulva, and a very wealthy and influential Storm Voice of
Orlanth. He is a calm, reasoned man, but a shrewd and fierce
politician. Bardrinor currently serves on the City Ring as the
representative of the Cinsina Tribe.

Gollanth the Exile
High Storm Voice, thane of the Torkani Tribe.
Gollanth was the chief priest of Orlanth Thunderous in Jonstown
but was exiled by the Lunar Empire in 1613 for his participation
in Starbrow’s Rebellion. He wandered west for several years of
adventuring in Ralios, eventually settling in Handra. He left
Handra to join King Broyan’s rebellion against the Lunar Empire
and fought at the Battle of Pennel Ford. When Jonstown was
liberated, he was part of the liberating army and was acclaimed
high Storm Voice for Jonstown.

Mata Min

39

RuneQuest

Typical Orlanthi Thane
Rune Lord of Orlanth. Age 30–50. Sartarite tribal leader.

STR CON
16
11
Attacks
Weapon
Broadsword
Medium Shield
Spirit Combat

SIZ
17
%
90
80
45

DEX
13

INT
12

POW CHA
12
14

Damage
1D8+1+1D6
1D4+1D6
1D6+1

SR
5
6
12

Pts
12
12
—

Hit Locations

Attributes

Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

Quality
Value
Hit Points
13
Move
8
Strike Rank 3 (DEX 2 SIZ 1)
Rune Points
7
Magic Points
29

D20 AP/HP
01–04
6/5
05–08
6/5
09–11
4/5
12
4/6
13–15
6/4
16–18
6/4
19–20
4/5

A llied and Bound Spirits

Runes: Air 80%, Beast 60%, Darkness 40%, Disorder 75%, Earth 20%,
Movement 65%.
Cults: Orlanth
Rune Spells: All common Rune spells, plus Detect Honor (1), Dismiss Air Elemental (1–2), Increase/Decrease Wind 1+, Lightning 1+,
Shield 1+, Summon Air Elemental (1–2), Wind Warp (1).

Bardrinor Red Cow

40

Spirit Magic: Bladesharp 3, Countermagic 2, Detect Enemies (1),
Detect Life (1), Heal 2, Mobility (1), Protection 2, Strength (2).
Magic Points: 29 (12 + 17 in bound spirit)
Passions: Devotion (Orlanth) 80%, Hate (Chaos) 60%, Honor
75%, Loyalty (Orlanth temple) 70%.
Reputation: 33%
Armor: Light scale hauberk, bronze greaves and vambraces, open
helm (–20% to Move Quietly).
Skills: Battle 40%, Climb 40%, Cult Lore (Orlanth) 70%,
Customs (Sartar) 55%, Dodge 40%, Farm 35%, First Aid 35%,
Homeland Lore (Sartar) 45%, Insight (humans) 35%, Jump
45%, Listen 35%, Manage Household 40%, Meditate 45%,
Move Quietly 30%, Orate 50%, Ride (horse) 25%, Scan 45%,
Sing 40%, Worship (Orlanth) 60%.
Languages: Speak Heortling 55%, Speak Stormspeech 45%,
Speak Tradetalk 25%, Read/Write Theyalan 20%.
Ransom: 650 L
Bound Spirit (alynx): POW 17 CHA 12; Spirit Magic: Demoralize (2), Parry 4.

Gollanth the Exile

The City of Jonstown

Harshax Elkenvale

Yerinna the Short, Master of the Bakers Guild

Orlanth Adventurous, chieftain of the Elk Clan of
the Culbrea Tribe.
An ambitious, educated man, Harshax is intensely loyal to the
House of Sartar. He was a friend and patron of Minaryth Purple
and commissioned him to gather information on troll cults
and secrets; Harshax openly believes that the Orlanthi must
ally with the Elder Races to finally defeat the Lunar Empire.
He spends half his time up in Elkenvale in the foothills of the
Quivin Mountains, the other half here in Jonstown.

The Bakers Guild has great influence because of their power
over the city’s food supplies and as a result, Yerinna is a member
of the City Ring. Yerinna wields that power to both protect
her members and enrich herself. She and her wife Nala own
the largest bakery in the city (see page 52).

Other Individuals of Note

Andrin Swenson

Issaries, Torkani Tribe.
Proprietor of the Black Alynx Inn, Andrin is an aggressive and
ruthless merchant; he is not one to shy away from violence or
banditry. He can be relied upon to keep his word and respect
the laws of hospitality; beyond that, he acts in accordance with
his long-term self-interest. A shrewd judge of others, Andrin
speaks with everyone who patronizes his inn, sizing them up
and determining whether they might have a role to play in one
of his schemes. An initiate of Issaries, Andrin is thoroughly
neutral in his politics.

Yerinna the Short
Initiate of Ernalda. Female, age 46. Cinsina Tribe.

STR CON
12
13
Attacks

SIZ
9

Weapon
Spirit Combat

%
60

DEX
13

INT
17

POW CHA
18
16

Damage
1D6+3

SR
12

Pts
—

Hit Locations

Attributes

Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

Quality
Value
Hit Points
14
Move
8
Strike Rank 4 (DEX 2 SIZ 2)
Rune Points
3
Magic Points
44

D20 AP/HP
01–04
0/5
05–08
0/5
09–11
0/5
12
0/6
13–15
0/4
16–18
0/4
19–20
0/5

Runes: Air 30%, Beast 60%, Earth 95%, Fertility 80%, Fire/Sky 60%,
Harmony 85%.
Cults: Ernalda
Rune Spells: All common Rune spells, plus Arouse Passion 1+, Bless
Crops 1+, Find Grain (1).
Spirit Magic: Detect Life (1), Heal 4, Second Sight (3), Slow (1)
Magic Points: 44 (18 + 26 in bound spirits and POW storage crystals)
Passions: Ambition 70%, Devotion (Ernalda) 75%, Love (Nala)
80%, Loyalty (Bakers Guild) 85%.
Reputation: 28%
Armor: None
Skills: Bargain 70%, Bureaucracy 45%, Charm 35%, Climb 55%,
Conceal 35%, Craft (baking) 100%, Cult Lore (Ernalda) 60%, Customs (Sartar) 45%, Dance 60%, Devise 45%, Dodge 50%, Evaluate
40%, Farm 60%, Homeland Lore (Sartar) 60%, Insight (humans)
55%, Intrigue 35%, Jump 60%, Listen 55%, Manage Household
80%, Meditate 60%, Orate 45%, Plant Lore 45%, Play Instrument
(nose flute) 45%, Ride (horse) 30%, Scan 45%, Search 55%, Sing
60%, Sleight 35%, Survival 40%, Worship (Ernalda) 75%.
Languages: Speak Earthtongue 45%, Speak Esrolian 45%, Speak
Heortling 80%, Speak Tradetalk 50%, Read/Write Theyalan 45%.
Magic Items: POW 13 storage crystal
Ransom: 1,400 L

A llied and Bound Spirits
Harshax Elkenvale

Bound Spirit (rat): POW 13 CHA 9; Spirit Magic: Dullblade 2,
Shimmer 3, Strength (2), Vigor (2).

41

RuneQuest

Sarostip Prince-Killer
Humakt, thane of Malani Tribe.
A Sword Lord of Humakt, Sarostip is a cousin of the present
Malani king, and was for many years the chieftain of his own
clan. Sarostip abdicated all clan and tribal offices and severed
himself from his kin, so that he might carry out a terrible
deed without his kin suffering the consequences. In 1624, on
Humakt’s high holy day, Sarostip led a band of Humakti from
the Malani and other tribes and killed the Lunar puppet ruler
of Sartar, Temertain the Philosopher. Sarostip led his killers
along a secret path in the Hero Plane to gain entry directly

into the Prince’s stronghold. After killing Temertain, Sarostip’s
Humakti cut their way through the Lunar priests, Telmori
warriors, and Sartarite bodyguards of Temertain, killing any
that would defend the prince.
Sarostip was a member of the Sartar High Council in both
1613 and 1625, and now serves on the City Ring. He is widely
seen as the leader of the Humakt cult in Sartar. He is often away
at Two Ridge Fort and speaks for the Malani Tribe at Jonstown.
He is a renowned weapons master and has quested deep into the
Underworld on behalf of his god. On one such quest, he gained
the ability to kill with his left eye, at the cost of sight in that eye.

Sarostip Prince-K iller
Sword Lord of Humakt. Male, age 52. Malani Tribe.

Geases: Eat no meat during Death Week; eat no cooked vegetables; mistrust all Aldryami (elves); never lie to a friendly cultist;
STR CON SIZ DEX INT POW CHA
never
refuse a challenge to one-on-one combat.
18
17
13
14
15
16
19
Magic
Points:
61 (16 + 45 in allied and bound spirits)
Attacks
Passions:
Devotion
(Humakt) 95%, Hate (Colymar) 60%, Hate
Weapon
%
Damage
SR
Pts
(Lunar
Empire)
70%,
Hate (Telmori) 60%, Honor 95%.
Left Eye*
95
Special
2
N/A
Reputation:
46%
Medium Shield
100
1D4+1D4
7
12
Armor: Full suit of enchanted iron plate armor, iron open helm
Broadsword, Iron**
115
1D8+1+1D4
6
18
(–50% to Move Quietly).
Greatsword
95
2D8+1D4
4
12
Skills: Bargain 35%, Battle 90%, Charm 35%, Climb 75%, ConJavelin, Thrown
95
1D10+1D2
1/MR
8
ceal 40%, Craft (iron) 75%, Cult Lore (Humakt) 95%, Customs
Spirit Combat
65
1D6+3
12
—
(Sartar) 40%, Dance 35%, Devise 60%, Dodge 75%, Elder Race
* Special power acquired on a heroquest: can be dodged but not parried, kills victim on
Lore (ducks) 35%, Evaluate 35%, Farm 40%, First Aid 65%,
a successful POW vs POW roll on the resistance table.
** Sword does double damage once armor is penetrated.
Hide 45%, Homeland Lore (Beast Valley) 30%, Homeland Lore
Hit Locations
Attributes
(Sartar) 50%, Insight (centaurs/ducks/humans) 30%/25%/50%,
Location
D20 AP/HP
Quality
Value
Intimidate 75%, Jump 80%, Listen 65%, Meditate 90%, Move
Right Leg
01–04
9/6
Hit Points
18
Quietly 45%, Orate 30%, Plant Lore 20%, Ride (horse) 55%,
Scan 75%, Search 55%, Sense Assassin 120%, Sing 40%, Sleight
Left Leg
05–08
9/6
Move
8
40%,
Survival 45%, Track 35%, Treat Disease 65%, Treat Poison
Abdomen
09–11
9/6
Strike Rank 4 (DEX 2 SIZ 2)
75%,
Worship (Humakt) 90%.
Chest
12
9/7
Rune Points
10
Languages:
Speak Heortling 85%, Speak Tradetalk 30%, Read/
Right Arm 13–15
9/5
Magic Points
61
Write
Theyalan
25%.
Left Arm
16–18
9/5
Magic
Items:
Three
scorpion venom POT 18 antidotes.
Head
19–20
6/6
Treasure: Enchanted iron broadsword (does double damage
Runes: Air 85%, Darkness 70%, Death 95%, Disorder 65%, Truth 95%, against elves and trolls if it does damage after armor is
subtracted).
Water 20%.
Ransom:
1,750 L
Cults: Humakt
Rune Spells: All common Rune spells, plus Bind Ghost (1), Detect
A llied and Bound Spirits
Truth (1), Enchant Iron 1+, Morale (2), Oath 1+, Sever Spirit (3),
Allied Spirit (bound into iron broadsword): POW 18 CHA 15;
Shield 1+, Sword Trance (1), True Sword (1), Turn Undead 1+.
Spirit Magic: Detect Enemies (1), Heal 6, Parry 4, Protection 4.
Spirit Magic: Bladesharp 4, Detect Undead (1), Disruption (1),
Bound Spirit (bound into armor): POW 13 CHA 13; Spirit
Fireblade (4).
Magic: Coordination (2), Demoralize (2).
Gifts: Iron broadsword does double damage once armor is peneBound Spirit (bound into shield): POW 14 CHA 12; Spirit
trated; heightened skill (Sense Assassin); recovers magic points at
Magic: Repair 2, Strength (2), Vigor (2).
double normal speed.

42

The City of Jonstown

Cit y Quarters

Ernalsulva, High Priestess of Ernalda
Ernalda, Malani Tribe.
Ernalsulva Entarios’ Daughter is the High Priestess for the
Earth Mother in Jonstown. She is related to much of the tribal
aristocracy—her mother is a Malani High Priestess and her
father was a heroic Culbrea king killed by the Lunars. She has
had several Year Husbands, including one that liberated her
father’s soul from a Lunar Hell. She is a skilled negotiator and
beloved leader, speaking for the Ernalda temple as well as its
associated cults.

Korang Jester
Eurmal, no tribe.
Korang Jester is the local priest of the Trickster and resides
in the temple atop Eurmal’s Hill. He has been a member of
the City Ring of Jonstown for almost two decades, although
nobody remembers appointing him. Korang Jester makes a
distinctive figure, painted in black and white stripes and always
wearing his distinctive cap with two floppy horns (which he
claims hides his ‘real’ horns). He asks difficult and socially
awkward questions and says things others are too afraid to say.

Each of the four quarters of Jonstown has its distinctive flavor.
The boundaries of the quarters wander with the fortunes of
the folk who live there. For instance, during the Occupation
there was a Lunar Quarter that included parts of what are now
the Scholar, Merchant, and Crafter Quarters. The Lunars were
expelled when the city was liberated, and their area seized by
other inhabitants.
In this section, each part of town is described, and its
boundaries are shown on a map. Population totals are included,
and important landmarks are described. Miscellaneous notes
indicate other important facts. Significant buildings are singled
out and listed.

Key to the Building Descriptions
Apartment

Multiple living quarters with a common entrance to the outside,
private entries within. These house 10–20 people in total. Living
units are self-contained. No servants are provided. A shop or
stalls probably face the main street, usually selling cheap food.

Common Residence
A residence for 10–15 people (two or three hearths), of whom
two to five are workers. These workers are most likely the owner
and employees of the shop in the building. The shops are separate
from the living quarters and face the street.

Inn or Taverns
Inns provide a room or rooms for people to rent to live in,
and taverns do not. They both provide food, drink, and
entertainment. The different emphasis and quality of these
subjects is what sets the establishments apart.

Shops
This indicates a building which is divided into a few small
shops rented by workers and shopkeepers. These shops may
be places of work, places to sell goods made elsewhere, or even
an office for meetings.

Temple

Ernalsulva Entarios’ Daughter

A temple may be a building constructed to serve as the residence
of a god, or it may be a sacred place where the god can commune
with worshipers. A temple typically is as ornately decorated as
the cult can afford, and often has ancillary structures for storage,
living quarters for priests, etc. Many temples provide food, drink,
and entertainment as part of their regular religious ceremonies.
Some have quarters where favored guests or notable cult members
can stay when visiting.

43

RuneQuest

Tenement
Multiple living quarters with a common entrance to the
outside. Facilities are shared. These have no servants, and
usually no individual quarters. A tenement houses 15–50 people,
depending on its size, and is typically crowded.

Warehouse
This building is used for storage of goods, typically grain,
timber, or other dry goods. Goods are often stored in large
clay pots called amphorae.

Wealthy Residence
This indicates a large building, usually well kept, which
includes quarters for servants, an area for mounts, etc. Usually
has 5–15 residents.

T he Upper Cit y
The Upper City was built by Sartar atop the site of an old
hill fort, of which little remains. It is located on a rocky spur
that overlooks the plains and covers about seven hectares. The
Upper City contains most of the public temples, government
buildings, and wealthy residences. This quarter is a source of
great civic pride.

A. Tower of the Winds
This is the tallest fortification in the city, a hexagonal tower
rising some 20 meters high. It is topped by a weathervane and
has a sundial that can be viewed from the Assembly Grounds.

1. Temple, Orlanth Thunderous
This is a rock outcropping atop the Upper City where lightning
regularly strikes whenever there is a thunderstorm. It is a great
temple to Orlanth Thunderous. Prior to the Lunar Occupation,
worshipers placed votive images and altars atop it, but these
were destroyed by the Lunars. After the liberation of the city,
Kallyr Starbrow had a new altar to Orlanth Thunderous built
here, and votive images and other gifts now surround it.

2. Temple, Orlanth Adventurous
Major temple to Orlanth Adventurous, with shrines to
Mastakos and Yinkin.

3. Temple, Chalana Arroy
At the base of the Orlanth Temple is a major temple to Chalana
Arroy (one of the largest in Sartar), called the House of Mercy.
The temple is a long rectangular stone building which serves
as a hospital and has space for the sick and wounded to rest,
relax, and exercise, as well as cells for the healers. Patients are

44

Going Shopping
Though the adventurers provided in the RuneQuest Starter
Set have all their necessary gear and weapons, they may
choose to seek out additional items or amenities.
These items represent a tiny sampling of what goods
and services are available within Jonstown and elsewhere
in Dragon Pass and should be used by the gamemaster as
a guide for other items not described here.

Cloak: Anywhere from 5 C for woven grass to 5 L for
fur or hide.
Clothes: 2 L for a set of rough cotton garments, up to
20 L for silk finery.
Dress: 1 L for a plain drape, up to 35 L for fashion from
Esrolia.
Drink: A bowl of mead or wine runs 1 C, and ale is much
cheaper. The famed clearwine (from Clearwine) runs 4 C
per bowl. A whole amphora of passable mead or wine
costs around 8 L and contains 75 bowls or mugs of booze.
Food: A hearty midday meal consisting of fried or
flatbread, cooked meat (beef, chicken, pork, fish, etc.),
a vegetable soup, fruit, and wine runs about 6 C.
Guard: Hiring a common guard willing to defend a
place or person is 1 L/day, much more for someone
with a high Reputation.
Herald: Hiring a decent herald to announce oneself or
to send a message costs 5 L/week or engagement.
Horse: 65 L for a riding horse, twice that for a warhorse.
Inns: A place on the common room floor costs 1 C
for the night, 3 C for a bed in a dormitory, 1 L for
a shared room, and 5 L for a private room with
amenities. See The Cost of Living on page 30 for
information about longer stays.
Jewelry: Anywhere from 1 L for a simple bronze ring to
3,000 L for a weighty, jeweled, golden bracelet.
Labor, Skilled: Anywhere from 3–10 C per day for a
skilled craftsperson.
Labor, Unskilled: Anywhere from 1–2 C per day.
Lamp: Only 2 L for a small clay oil lamp and enough oil
to burn for hours.
Music Instruments: These can range from 2 C for
some cheap reed pipes or gourd rattles to 25 L for a
fancy lute or lyre.
Research: Sages set their own prices for their services,
anywhere between 10–100 L, depending on subject.
Riding Gear: 2 L for basic rope tack and a blanket
saddle, up to 20 L for fine leather- and metal-working.
Sacrifice: Ranges from small to large animal (1 C for
a chicken, 2 L for a pig, 3 L for a sheep, and 20 L for a
cow), to incense (1 C for a bundle of scented sticks or
a small nugget, more for higher quality).
Tools: A cheap stone hammer might be 5 C, 15 meters
(16½ yards) of rope: 2 C; a shovel: 5 C; up to a sturdy
bronze pick for 10 L, or a bronze lock for 25 L.
Torches: A bunch of wicker torches for 5 L.

The City of Jonstown

treated and fed by healers and are under the protection of the
cult while they are cared for.

4. Gymnasia
This building is part of the Chalana Arroy temple complex
and consists of three covered porticos surrounding a central
courtyard where adult men and women strengthen their bodies
through exercise and training.

5. Public Bath
This public bath is part of the Chalana Arroy temple complex.
It is free and open to any creature not of Chaos.

6. Temple, Grain Goddess
Shrine to Esrola the Grain Goddess.

7. Temple, Yelmalio
This golden-domed shrine to Yelmalio serves the needs of the
local cult and of travelers.

9. Temple, Earth
This ornate stone temple is shaped like the Earth Rune. The
temple sanctum where the goddess resides is beneath the earth.
The goddess emerges from within on sacred days. It is a major
temple to Ernalda, with shrines to Asrelia, Babeester Gor,
Maran Gor, and Voria.

10. Rent a Shrine
An enterprising property owner named Rostinil has turned this
long-abandoned temple into a generic worship place, renting
it out to any cult who lacks an established temple of their own.
Chaos cults are of course forbidden. Rates are 10 L per day.
Incense is free. For an extra fee, Rostinil can throw in some
plain robes and candles, if needed. He also knows of many
out-of-work musicians who might be hired out to provide
musical accompaniment for religious rituals.

11. Council House

8. Temple, Argan Argar

The City Ring convenes here daily, except during religious festivals
and on ill-favored days, to confer and decide upon public affairs.
A bronze bell on the roof is rung when the City Ring is in session.

This minor temple to Argan Argar is supported by the
Torkani Tribe.

12. Residence, City Rex’s House
This is the residence of the City Rex, currently occupied by
Orngerin Holdfast and his household.

45

RuneQuest

13. Temple, Humakt
This minor temple to Humakt also serves as a mercenary
hiring house. It is supported by the Malani Tribe. Guards
or mercenaries can be hired here for 2 L (or more) per day,
depending on their experience.

14. Temple, Sartar and Orlanth Rex
This rock outcropping serves as a major temple to Sartar and
Orlanth Rex. Hauberk Jon, the city wyter, resides here, bound
to his ancient hauberk.

20. Temple, Seven Mothers
This building is in ruins. The Seven Mothers temple was
founded in 1602, however, the temple was burned down
during the events of Starbrow’s Rebellion. After the city was
returned to Lunar rule, a larger temple was commissioned
by Governor Fazzur Wideread. That temple was looted and
burned down during the city’s liberation in Earth Season
1625. Beneath its surface is a small catacomb of connected
chambers, where the inner mysteries of the cult were rumored
to be taught.

21. Inn, Geo’s
This inn was established by an old Sartar family and is well
connected to the Sartar cult. During the Lunar Occupation,
it became popular with those who opposed the Empire. Good
clean rooms, good food and drink. Prices are as described on
page 44, though a bit on the higher side, with an emphasis on
travelers’ comfort.

22. Inn, Hauberk Jon’s
This inn was established shortly after the foundation of the
city. Good rooms, good food, and good drink are the rule here.
More traditional than Geo’s, the common room is usually full
of regular customers, and strangers might receive a bit of a
wary eye upon entering.

Healing for Hire
The Chalana Arroy temple is a famous hospital, its healers
renowned throughout Dragon Pass. Despite the prevalence
of magical healing, not everyone has access to or needs it.
When possible, natural methods of healing and treatment—
First Aid, Plant Lore, Treat Disease, or Treat Poison skills—are
the preferred methods.
Healers never ask for payment. However, a custom
enforced by the gods has it that if someone is saved from
disease, poison, maiming, or death by the actions of a healer,
they immediately give the healer’s temple (or nearest temple,
if the healer is unaffiliated) an appropriately generous gift.
The greater the gift, the more honored the giver, and the
happier the healers next time they minister to their wounds.
If the person cannot pay with coin or gift, service is accepted.
Lesser, non-threatening injuries and maladies are
either treated for free, or with a much lower contribution
expected in return. When a Chalana Arroy healer’s services
are required outside the temple, their food, board, and
safety are assumed to be provided by the one who has
requested their aid.
Suggested donations are as follows, with page references
to Book 1: Rules:

Natural Treatment

Injury (First Aid): 1 C (1/10 L) per hit point
. Minor
restored
Illness or Other Maladies* (Treat Disease): 1 L per
. day
of treatment
Disease (Treat Disease): 1 L per day of treatment
. (see
page 57)
(Treat Poison): 2 C per point of poison
. Poisoning
potency (POT, see page 60)
. Childbirth (First Aid): Free

Magical Healing

(page 36): 1 L per hit point restored
. Heal
Body (page 44): 60 L
. Heal
Heal Wound (page 44): 20+1 L per point restored
. Regrow
(page 47): 40 L per limb
. ResurrectLimb
(page 47): A year’s income
. Other Spells:
20 L per Rune point spent
.

* Includes hit point loss from drowning, exposure, asphyxiation, hunger, thirst, etc.

Assembly Grounds

Residence, Dinacoli House

This area is the popular assembly grounds for the citizens of
Jonstown. Each season, the citizens of Jonstown gather here to
discuss matters of civic importance. Other weeks, this serves as
a local market, specializing in fresh food and other small items.

Bolted shut, the Dinacoli house has been abandoned since
1614. Outside is a wooden horse head. A local superstition has
people brush the horse’s wooden mane for luck when passing.

Residence, Cinsina Tribal House
This house serves as the residence of the Cinsina tribal king
whenever she is in the city. Cinsina Tribe members are entitled
to hospitality here. The caretaker here is One-Legged Viturian,
who never lets the house run out of honey. Outside there is a
copper statue of a cow.

46

Residence, Malani Tribal House
This house serves as the residence of the Malani tribal king
whenever she is in the city. Malani Tribe members are entitled
to hospitality here. Brandgor Bisonbane is the caretaker, known
for his sad songs. Outside is a bronze statue of a boar. Children
often dare one another to run up and kiss the boar’s snout, then
run away before the two guards chase them off.

The City of Jonstown

Residence, Maboder House

15. Temple, Lhankor Mhy

The Maboder House has been empty since 1615 and is currently
used for storage.

The Jonstown Library was founded as a great temple to
Lhankor Mhy in 1525 by King Sartar’s second son, Eonistaran
the Sage. The Library has always enjoyed the strong support
of the House of Sartar, and during the Lunar Occupation,
it was here that the heroic scholar Minaryth the Purple
plotted out the rebellion and mapped out the myths and
heroquesting needed to defeat the Empire. The temple has
some 150 initiates and enjoys primacy in Sartar. As a result
of its presence, Jonstown itself is more literate than most
Orlanthi settlements, and a large percentage of the citizens of
Jonstown are lay members of Lhankor Mhy. As the foundation
of the temple is 100 years old as of 1625, the members of the
temple and the city itself show a great deal of pride in this
landmark anniversary.
The Jonstown Library has a collection of approximately
10,000 scrolls, gathered from across the world. A scroll
typically consists of numerous sheets of parchment sewn
together, creating scrolls 40–75 meters long when fully
unrolled. An individual scroll may consist of many unrelated
chapters sewn together. A scholar needs to know the contents
of a scroll in order to know that the scroll List of Animal Gods
(titled after its first chapter), for example, also includes several
chapters on the history of the Shadowlands and a collection
of recipes from Nochet. These scrolls in the Jonstown Library
include collections about the God Learners, the Empire of
the Wyrms Friends, and the trolls.
Its most famous feature is a series of scrolls called the
Jonstown Compendium. These consist of scraps of material
various scribes deemed worthy of recording over the years.
These scraps have been culled from the minds of great
philosophers, tribal poets, and lawspeakers, or translated from
various odd scrolls and ancient parchments. Each entry begins
with a number and are gathered and listed, one after the other,
without regard to order or topic. Sometimes a title begins an
entry, wherein the author or redactor identifies themselves.
Individual entries can be of any length. One entire volume
contains a single entry over 250 sheets in length, but most list
hundreds of pieces of information. Most entries contain large
amounts of dross and trivial information among the bits of
useful knowledge. Such is the habit of the sages of Lhankor
Mhy, to value all knowledge, no matter how obscure.
Three stories high, the Library is the most striking building
in the city of Jonstown. Built in stone with a red tiled terracotta
roof, it is warded with magical signs and Runes to protect
against fire. Bronze-bound solid oak doors bar entry to the arms
of the Library. Narrow windows line each floor, too small for
a person to pass through but high enough to let light in, deep
enough to reduce drafts and winds. Before the entrance is an

Residence, Culbrea House
This house serves as the residence of the Culbrea tribal king
whenever he is in the city. Culbrea Tribe members are entitled
to hospitality here. The caretaker is Estavar Bultsson, who
carves a small wooden statue of every new visitor—a collection
which now takes up a whole wall in the house. Outside is a trio
of bronze statues depicting an elk, a fox, and an owl.

Residence, Torkani House
This house serves as the residence of the Torkani tribal king
(whenever she is in the city). Torkani Tribe members are entitled
to hospitality here. Jonrik Darkspear is the caretaker here, and
many of his assistants are trollkin. Outside is a copper statue of
a pregnant woman, her belly worn bright from the touches of
women wishing to either become pregnant or to bless the birth.

Schol ars Quarter
This area is dominated by the temple library of Lhankor
Mhy and its scribes and apprentices. Since the founding of
the Knowledge Temple in 1521, this area has been patronized
by the royal dynasty. Even under the Lunar Occupation, the
Knowledge Temple enjoyed the favor of Prince Temertain, who
added to its valuable collection of Malkioni scrolls.
Much of the economic activity in the Scholars Quarter
depends directly or indirectly upon the Knowledge Temple.
The area is home to many scribes, who serve as clerks, teachers,
as well as scholars. Esoteric arguments are common here—
sometimes escalating into fights and even riots.

B. Under the Hill
This is a tunnel that connects the Upper City with the Main
City. An architectural wonder, it was built by Sartar’s dwarf
friends when the city was founded. The angle of the tunnel is
such that teams can pull wheeled vehicles up the tunnel and
the tunnel is big enough that travelers can walk alongside such
vehicles safely. A few side tunnels connect to it, nominally used
for drainage but sealed against trespassers. Some say these side
tunnels connect to catacombs beneath the Upper City.

Over the Wall
This stone stairway was built by Sartar’s dwarf friends when
the city was founded.

47

RuneQuest
altar for animal sacrifices. Nearby are screens for stretching
treated skins to make parchment.
Like most Lhankor Mhy temples, the Jonstown Library is
built in a Y-shape (the shape of the Truth Rune). Each arm of
the Y has a special function, with additional functions for the
center junction.

Base Arm
This three-story stone hall is some 14 meters high.

. Entry Hall: The main entry hall into the Library is as

.

.

far as most non-initiates are permitted to go. Columns
support the high ceiling, which rises some six meters
above the tiled floor. Scholars meet with clients here in
the vaulted alcoves. A bronze door in the rear leads to the
main collection.
Second Floor: Here is kept the overflow from the
main collection; voluminous correspondences, records
of Sartarite assemblies, records of the Princes of Sartar,
unsorted gifts and bequests to the Library, stacks of notes,
and so forth. Not since Desosinderus was Librarian have
the contents of this room been fully categorized.
Third Floor: The only entry to this room is through
a dwarf-built door with a magical array of locks and
seals; only the librarian and his assistant know the secret
of opening the locks. The chamber contains a trove of
dangerous treasures, including the library’s collection of
sorcerous grimoires, the Book of Drastic Resolutions, and
other texts written in blasphemous languages.

Center Junction

Eonistaran’s Catalog Wheel
The great Catalog Wheel of Eonistaran is a wooden device
like a broad water wheel. Each of the Wheel’s seven boards
holds multiple scrolls containing a partial listing of the
scrolls and codices within the library’s collection. At least
five different organizational systems coexist within these
great scrolls; some are numbered, some are based on the
first line, another based on a cryptic code, and so on. If a
scholar cannot find what they are looking for in one scroll,
they simply turn the wheel and look in another scroll.
Most scholars agree that the 120 volumes of Garangian Bronze-Gut’s Compendium of Persons Eminent in Every
Branch of Learning with a List of their Writings is far more
comprehensive (but conversely, far less practical to use)
than Desosinderus the Librarian’s more concise Scheme of
the Great Bookshelves.

Main Collection: The main library collection is housed in an
open vaulted chamber rising some 22 meters from the floor
to the ceiling. This room connects all the arms and has nine
doors, three for each floor. Walkways go around the upper
floors, with a forest of ladders allowing passage up and down.
The three walls are covered with shelves for scrolls reaching up
to the vault. Reading tables can be found on the ground floor
and built into alcoves throughout the floor. The great Catalog
Wheel of Eonistaran is consulted by scholars seeking a specific
scroll. The entire room is bewildering and amazing to all but
the most seasoned visitor.
Thousands of scrolls line the walls. The most famous set of
works, the Jonstown Compendium, has several dedicated stacks
on the ground floor.

Left Arm
This three-story stone building is about 12 meters high.

48

The City of Jonstown

. The ground floor’s long room with a vaulted ceiling
.
.

above short columns is divided between kitchen and a
large area for communal dining.
The second floor is the scriptorium. This hall is
ingeniously heated by air warmed by the kitchen. Here
the apprentices and initiates copy scrolls.
The third floor is given way to storage, though
surprisingly neat and organized.

Right Arm
This three-story stone building is about 12 meters high.

. The ground floor is a long room with a vaulted ceiling
.
.

above short columns, serving as the dormitory for
apprentices. Stairs lead up to the first floor.
The second floor has ten small rooms for the junior sages.
The third is divided into six rooms for the senior sages.

16. Temple, Uleria
Frequent public ceremonies for Uleria, the goddess of love. Private
ceremonies upon request. Includes public baths for worshipers.
The suggested donation for a visit with a temple initiate or
priestess is 5 L or more, depending on the nature of the ceremony.

23. Tavern, The Red Harlot
Has an obscene and blasphemous picture of the Red Goddess as
a common harlot. Prices are a little cheaper than those provided
on page 44, with correspondingly lower quality. Lunars are
especially unwelcome here.

24. Tavern, The Jellied Eel
The Jellied Eel is a notorious den of gambling, patronized by
scribes. Despite the reputation, it’s a fairly safe place, save for
the financial risk.
Should adventurers wish to gamble here, once per visit they
can pick how much to wager (in L) and attempt a Gaming roll.
Success yields that much back in profit above and beyond that
which was wagered. A special success doubles the amount and
a critical success increases it by ×5. Failure means the money
is lost, and a fumble means that an additional amount equal
to the initial wager is lost.
If a gambler cannot pay, the situation may escalate to the
city guard being called, or more significant trouble being had.

25. Tavern, The Back Door
This nondescript tavern is favored by those who would rather
their presence and business dealings go unnoticed. Shadowy
and quiet, it is the perfect spot for clandestine business, shady
purchases of hazia (1–10 L per dose, depending on quality), or
a discreet rendezvous. Prices are standard, service indifferent.

Inn, The Gilded Beard
A favorite of the Free Sages and their apprentices, this inn is
run by Morion Vorash. It is a three-story stone building with a
cellar (used as a brewery). Private rooms on the second floor are
occasionally used for discreet meetings with the Free Sages. The
inn brews the strongest drink in the city, the seasonal Jonstown
ice beer (made only in late Darkness and Storm Seasons). This
dark, copper-colored beer is notorious for its strength; when

49

RuneQuest

in season, the occasional civilized (and somewhat inebriated)
troll can be found in the Gilded Beard.
Prices are at the high end, but worth it.

Market, South
This market is also called the Book Market, where scrolls
and scraps of knowledge are exchanged with the scribes of
the Jonstown Library. Here also one can find sheep skins for
parchment, ingredients for ink, and other tools used by scribes
and sages. See page 44 for paper or writing implement prices.
Books or scrolls range from the very cheap (1 L) to
exorbitant (500+ L for a particularly valuable scroll or book),
but the Lhankor Mhy library is usually the first stop for anyone
wishing to sell something of true value, and thus the pickings
here represent what the buyers within the Knowledge Temple
passed over.

Ruined Barracks
These were the barracks for the Lunar garrison in Jonstown.
This building was looted and burned down during the city’s
liberation in Earth Season 1625.

Residence, Wealthy Sage
Krisgrin Many-Tongue the Lhankor Mhy Sage resides here.

Residence, Wealthy Astronomer
Synagerin Book, a Lhankor Mhy Sage resides here. His focus
of knowledge is astronomy (Celestial Lore 95%).

50

Merch a n t ’s Quarter
17. Temple, Issaries
Atop this hill is an Issaries Temple overlooking both the North
Market (main local market) and the Great Market (main
permanent market). The temple’s fine golden statue of Issaries
was stolen during the fall of the city in Earth Season. It serves as
a major temple to Issaries and is as much a place of commerce as
of worship. Money is exchanged or lent, agreements witnessed,
and disputes between merchants are resolved here.

18. Temple, Lokarnos
A small but well-furnished temple to Lokarnos, a god of trade.

26. Inn, The Black Alynx
A popular inn with adventurers, traders, and Free Sages, this inn
is a large stone and timber building with two floors and a cellar.
It is built around a main room that serves as the tavern and
common room for meals and entertainment. Over an open fire
pit in the center of the tavern hangs an ornate silver cauldron that
the serving women keep filled with slow-boiling meat, vegetables,
and herbs. The cauldron was brought back from the Big Rubble
by the innkeeper Andrin Swenson (page 41), and is made from
five silver plates depicting scenes from the founding of Old Pavis.
Andrin keeps a close watch on everything going on in the
tavern and often serves as a hiring agent or a silent partner in
unconventional business ventures. Prices are reasonable and
the service and ambiance are well regarded.

The City of Jonstown

27. Inn, Bull and Ram

Market, North

This is the favored inn for caravans arriving from Tarsh. The
innkeeper won the establishment in a game of gambling sticks
and turned it from a run-down second-class dive to somewhere
visiting merchants were happy to pay extra to stay. The inn is
a large stone hall with two floors of rooms in the rear.
Prices are at the high end of those on page 44, but worth it
to those who value comfort, security, and quality of experience.

Also called the Meat Market, where traders sell livestock, is
situated near the North Gate. Farmers from the clans sell
cows, sheep, pigs, and fowls, the major stapes of the market,
but traders also sell horses, and other domestic beasts, both
foreign or exotic. Members of the Butchers Guild sit in the
market awaiting employment, with their sharp bronze knives
out before them as an advertisement and proof of skill. Locals
who buy an animal from the market also hire one of these
butchers, taking them home to their house to slaughter the
animal and cut the meat.

28. Wealthy Residence,
Hornos Brothers
This large three-story stone building houses the trading goods
of the Hornos brothers (page 37) and is the center of their
trading network. Bulk goods, manufactured goods, and luxuries
are all carefully stacked within and inventoried by clerks. The
actual composition of goods changes from season to season.
The warehouse serves as a fortress within the walls of the city
and is guarded by a small private army of mercenaries, who
also serve as the Hornos brothers’ debt collectors.

Market, Great
This is the main market for caravans and receives goods from Prax,
the Holy Country, and the Lunar Empire. Here all sorts of goods
change hands, from wine to glass, bronze, and Pelorian pottery.

Warehouse
Public meat warehouse, only preserved stock is kept on hand.

29. Wealthy Residence, Joh Mith

Warehouse, Empty

This three-story stone house is the home and warehouse of Joh
Mith, the Goldentongue Priest (page 36). Joh is assisted by his
Issaries Priestess wife Zix Porub, and their daughter Thinelda
and her husband Jorator.

Former warehouse for dried fruits and vegetables, damaged
heavily during the fighting and now empty. The city guard
sometimes employs this musty building as a makeshift jail.

Granaries
Storage for the public grain.

Public Bath
Very basic, but also the most commonly-used public bath in
the city. Entry costs 1 C.

51

RuneQuest

Guild Hall

32. Inn, Hot Rooster

A plain, utilitarian structure where various merchant guilds meet
and negotiate. Often the site of vigorous debate and argument,
while private guards wait outside to keep eavesdroppers away
and to protect their masters’ safety upon their emergence from
particularly vicious negotiations.

A popular tavern with South Quarter regulars, Kollus the
Smooth serves renowned meat stews, sausages, and savory meat
pies. It also has rooms to let on the floor above.

Cr a f ter’s Quarter
19. Eurmal Hill
This small hill is sacred to Eurmal the Trickster and serves as
a shrine to that dangerous god.

30. Tavern, The Puppet House
A nondescript tavern popular among students, adorned with
old marionettes and shadow figure puppets. Cheap, but with
a limited selection.

31. Tavern, Blackbelly Two
Two pigs who escaped the butcher’s knives and led the
brotherhood on a merry chase across the city finally took shelter
in this tavern, popular with adventurers. The regulars took
pity on the escapees and when the butchers arrived, they drew
swords and sprang to their defense. The innkeeper, Ostlan
the Greasy, in sympathy with his outraged patrons, paid off
the buyer and his butchers and took pork off the menu. The
‘Blackbelly Two’ have enjoyed the status of tavern pets ever since,
a decision Ostlan never regretted after locals made the journey
to his inn to see pigs who had become popular folk heroes.

52

Inn, The Three Suns
An elegant inn catering to the wealthy, welcome only to those
of discerning taste. Prices are easily the highest in town, and
rooms are often empty but unavailable. Getting a room here
requires a successful Reputation roll, a noble background, or
reference from a member of the Jonstown City Ring.

Bakery
Yerinna’s Bakery, the largest in the city. It houses five large
stone mills turned by two workers each and a large brick oven.
Yerinna is described on page 41, and her wife Nala handles the
daily transactions.

The City of Jonstown

The People of Jonstown
Generally, when dealing with a nonplayer character in a social
or roleplaying situation, all the gamemaster needs is a name
and a basic description, which can often be improvised as
needed. Sometimes, however, an actual example is necessary.
Following are descriptions of typical residents of Jonstown
for the gamemaster’s use. They can be customized as
desired, if needed.

Unlike the typical Jonstown citizen (following) the typical
resident is a recent émigré, a refugee from the countryside,
poor, or unfree. They may be a menial laborer or servant and
do not have the right to vote or own property.

Typical R esident
Lay member of Orlanth or Ernalda

CON
11

SIZ
13

DEX
9

INT
14

POW CHA
15
12

Attacks
Weapon
Knife
Spirit Combat

%
35
30

Damage
1D4+2+1D4
1D6+1

SR
9
12

Pts
6
—

Hit Locations

Attributes

Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

Quality
Value
Hit Points
11
Move
8
Strike Rank 5 (DEX 3 SIZ 2)
Rune Points
—
Magic Points
15

D20 AP/HP
01–04
0/4
05–08
0/4
09–11
1/4
12
1/5
13–15
0/3
16–18
0/3
19–20
0/4

Typical Citizen
Initiate of Orlanth Thunderous, lay member of Orlanth Rex

Typical Resident of Jonstown

STR
12

Typical Citizen of Jonstown
As described on page 31, a Jonstown citizen must be at least a
lay member of Orlanth Rex, own the land on which they live,
have income, pay taxes to the city, reside in Jonstown, and bear
arms (if able) to defend the city. They are generally better fed,
healthier, and better off than mere residents.

Runes: Air 60% or Earth 60%, Man 55%.
Spirit Magic: Bladesharp 1, Countermagic 1, Farsee 1, Heal 2,
Lantern (1), Repair 2.
Passions: Devotion (Orlanth or Ernalda) 60%, Hate (Lunars) 60%,
Love (family) 70%.
Armor: Leather apron.
Skills: Craft (as appropriate) 55%, Customs (Sartar) 30%, Dodge
20%, Farm 35%, First Aid 30%, Hide 30%, Homeland Lore
(Sartar) 35%, Insight (humans) 25%, Listen 40%, Manage Household 15%, Scan 40%, Search 30%, Sing 30%.
Languages: Speak Heortling 70%, Speak New Pelorian 15%, Speak
Tradetalk 25%.
Ransom: 100 L (if any)

STR
13

CON
12

SIZ
13

Weapon
Dagger
Broadsword
Medium Shield
Short Spear, Held
Spirit Combat

%
45
50
50
60
35

DEX
11

INT
14

POW CHA
15
13

Attacks
Damage
1D4+2+1D4
1D8+2+1d4
1D4+1D4
1D6+1+1D4
1D6+1

SR
9
7
8
7
12

Pts
6
12
12
10
—

Hit Locations

Attributes

Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

Quality
Value
Hit Points
13
Move
8
Strike Rank 5 (DEX 3 SIZ 2)
Rune Points
3
Magic Points
15

D20 AP/HP
01–04
0/5
05–08
0/5
09–11
1/5
12
1/6
13–15
0/4
16–18
0/4
19–20
0/5

Runes: Air 80%, Man 60%, Movement 60%, Truth 60%.
Cults: Orlanth Thunderous, Orlanth Rex, possibly others.
Rune Spells: All common Rune spells plus Dismiss Air Elemental
(1), Increase/Decrease Wind 1+, Wind Words (1). If Ernaldan,
Dismiss Earth Elemental (1).
Spirit Magic: Bladesharp 2, Countermagic 2, Detect Enemies (1),
Heal 2, Mobility (1), Protection 1, Strength (2).
Passions: Devotion (Orlanth) 70%, Hate (Lunars) 70%, Love
(family) 70%, Loyalty (guild) 60%, Loyalty (Jonstown) 70%.
Reputation: 1D3+3%
Armor: Leather jerkin, when encountered in normal circumstances.
If needed, a Jonstown citizen can equip themselves with bronze
greaves and vambraces, a light scale hauberk, and a composite helm.
Skills: Bargain 25%, Craft (as appropriate) 60%, Customs
(Sartar) 40%, Dodge 30%, Farm 45%, First Aid 30%, Hide 30%,
Homeland Lore (Sartar) 40%, Insight (human) 30%, Listen 40%,
Manage Household 30%, Scan 40%, Search 30%, Sing 30%.
Languages: Speak Heortling 70%, Speak New Pelorian 15%, Speak
Tradetalk 25%, Read/Write Theyalan 40%.
Ransom: 500 L

53

RuneQuest

Typical Jonstown City Guard

Typical Jonstown Militia Member

Most city guards in Jonstown are proud Sartarites from the local
tribes, usually mercenaries who trained and returned or stayed
in town. There are generally 50 full-time guards and another
40 or so trained civilians who serve infrequently as deputized.
The city guard of Jonstown enjoy their status and take their
responsibilities very seriously.

One of roughly 500 part-time soldiers, the militia are drawn
from the nearby tribes and are picked from the most ablebodied and competent. Most are farmers or the children of
farmers, but each is expected to provide a spear, shield, and
strong hat at the very least. Scavenged Lunar swords, helmets,
and metal armor are not uncommon. In times of crisis, the
City Rex can call for another 2,500 militia members from the
neighboring tribes.

Typical Jonstown City Guard
Initiate of Orlanth Adventurous

STR
14

CON
13

SIZ
13

DEX
12

INT
12

POW CHA
13
13

Attacks
Weapon
Broadsword
Medium Shield
Javelin, Held
Javelin, Thrown
Spirit Combat

%
60
55
50
50
35

Damage
1D8+1+1D4
1D4+1D4
1D6+1D4
1D8+1D2
1D6

SR
7
8
7
1/MR
12

Pts
12
12
8
8
—

Hit Locations

Attributes

Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

Quality
Value
Hit Points
14
Move
8
Strike Rank 5 (DEX 3 SIZ 2)
Rune Points
3
Magic Points
13

D20 AP/HP
01–04
6/5
05–08
6/5
09–11
3/5
12
6/6
13–15
6/4
16–18
6/4
19–20
4/5

Runes: Air 80%, Movement 70%.
Cults: Orlanth Adventurous
Rune Spells: All common Rune spells plus Increase/Decrease Wind
1+, Leap 1+, Shield 1+.
Spirit Magic: Bladesharp 2, Heal 2, Protection 2.
Passions: Honor 70%, Loyalty (Jonstown) 70%, Loyalty (temple) 60%
Armor: Bronze cuirass, studded leather skirt, bronze greaves and
vambraces, open helm.
Skills: Battle 30%, Climb 60%, First Aid 50%, Herding 60%, Hide
35%, Jump 60%, Listen 40%, Ride 35%, Scan 35%.
Languages: Speak Heortling 60%, Speak New Pelorian 20%, Speak
Tradetalk 30%.
Treasure: Carries 1D20 L.
Ransom: 1,000 L

54

Typical Jonstown Militia M ember
Initiate of Orlanth Thunderous

STR
12

CON
12

SIZ
13

DEX
11

INT
13

POW CHA
12
12

Attacks
Weapon
Broadsword
1H Spear
Medium Shield
Javelin, Held
Javelin, Thrown
Spirit Combat

%
60
40
55
40
50
50

Damage
1D8+1+1D4
1D8+1+1D4
1D4+1D4
1D6+1D4
1D8+1D2
1D6

SR
7
7
8
7
1/MR
12

Pts
12
10
12
8
8
—

Hit Locations

Attributes

Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

Quality
Value
Hit Points
13
Move
8
Strike Rank 5 (DEX 3 SIZ 2)
Rune Points
3
Magic Points
12

D20 AP/HP
01–04
3/5
05–08
3/5
09–11
3/5
12
3/6
13–15
3/4
16–18
3/4
19–20
4/5

Runes: Air 75%, Movement 70%.
Cults: Orlanth Thunderous
Rune Spells: All common Rune spells plus Cloud Call 1+, Increase/
Decrease Wind 1+, Wind Warp (1).
Spirit Magic: Bladesharp 2, Heal 3, Protection 2, Strength (2).
Passions: Devotion (Orlanth) 60%, Loyalty (clan) 60%.
Armor: Quilted linen hauberk, cuirboilli greaves and vambraces,
open helm.
Skills: Climb 50%, Farm 60%, First Aid 40%, Herd 65%, Hide
45%, Jump 50%, Listen 50%, Ride (horse) 25%, Scan 40%.
Languages: Speak Heortling 65%, Speak Tradetalk 25%.
Treasure: Each has 1 hide of land to their family or a herd of 20
cattle or 100 sheep.
Ransom: 500 L

The City of Jonstown

Typical Jonstown Merchant

Typical Jonstown Free Sage

Most Jonstown merchants are Sartarites, though some came
from further afield—such as from the Holy Country or Prax.
Nearly all are initiates of Issaries. In older times there were also
Etyries initiates among the Lunar denizens of the city, but now
they have been driven far afield. Most merchants own their
shops or stands and are noncombatants, preferring to call for
the city guard when threatened.

These scholars form the basis of Jonstown’s reputation as a
city of learning, all initiates and priests of Lhankor Mhy either
loosely or directly connected to the Temple of Knowledge. The
Free Sages sell their knowledge to any who can pay. Most are
male, but they are nor restricted by gender. All, though, wear
real or false beards to indicate their learned status. One does
not have to go far before seeing one or more Free Sages caught
up in fierce debate over subjects esoteric, sublime, or even
concerning worldly matters. See page 44 for information on
the rates Free Sages charge for consulting.

Typical Jonstown M erchant
Initiate of Issaries and Lokarnos

STR
9

CON
11

SIZ
13

DEX
9

INT
13

POW CHA
13
14

Typical Jonstown Free Sage
Initiate of Lhankor Mhy

Attacks
Weapon
Spirit Combat

%
50

Damage
1D6+1

SR
12

Pts
—

STR
7

CON
12

SIZ
11

DEX
8

INT
17

POW CHA
16
12

Hit Locations

Attributes

Attacks

Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

Quality
Value
Hit Points
13
Move
8
Strike Rank 5 (DEX 3 SIZ 2)
Rune Points
2
Magic Points
13

Hit Locations

Attributes

Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

Quality
Value
Hit Points
13
Move
8
Strike Rank 6 (DEX 4 SIZ 2)
Rune Points
3
Magic Points
16

D20 AP/HP
01–04
0/5
05–08
0/5
09–11
0/5
12
0/6
13–15
0/4
16–18
0/4
19–20
0/5

Runes: Air 60%, Darkness 40%, Earth 40%, Harmony 85%, Man 65%,
Movement 60%.
Cult: Issaries, Lokarnos
Rune Spells: All common Rune spells, plus Lock (1), Passage (1).
Spirit Magic: Farsee 2, Glamour (2), Glue 2, Lantern (1), Repair 2.
Passions: Fear (poverty) 70%, Hate (Chaos) 80%, Loyalty (Jonstown) 75%, Loyalty (Merchants Guild) 75%.
Reputation: 10%
Armor: None
Skills: Bargain 60%, Charm 35%, Cult Lore (Issaries) 55%, Cult
Lore (Lokarnos) 35%, Customs (Sartar) 45%, Devise 40%, Dodge
40%, Evaluate 70%, Fast Talk 50%, Homeland Lore (Sartar) 65%,
Insight (humans) 50%, Listen 55%, Manage Household 50%,
Orate 30%, Scan 55%, Worship (Issaries) 60%, Worship (Lokarnos) 45%.
Languages: Speak Heortling 90%, Speak Tradetalk 70%, Read/
Write Theyalan 60%, Read/Write Tradetalk 60%.
Magic Items: Ivory family crest on a brooch that acts as a spell
matrix for Heal 2.
Treasure: Very rich. Usually carries 2D100 L.
Ransom: 1,000 L

Weapon
Spirit Combat

%
55
D20 AP/HP
01–04
0/5
05–08
0/5
09–11
0/5
12
0/6
13–15
0/4
16–18
0/4
19–20
0/5

Damage
1D6+1

SR
12

Pts
—

Runes: Fire/Sky 70%, Man 60%, Stasis 75%, Truth 75%.
Cults: Lhankor Mhy
Rune Spells: All common Rune spells, plus Analyze Magic (1),
Knowledge (2), Reconstruction (3).
Spirit Magic: Detect Magic (1), Farsee 2, Lantern (1), Repair 1.
Sorcery: Has mastered the Command and Summon techniques and
the Truth Rune.
Sorcery Spells: Logician (2) 45%.
Passions: Love (Knowledge) 60%, Loyalty (Jonstown Lhankor Mhy
Temple) 75%, Loyalty (Sartar) 60%.
Reputation: 12%
Armor: None
Skills: One Knowledge skill relating to their specialty at 90%, plus
Bargain 40%, Bureaucracy 50%, Celestial Lore 35%, Craft (mapmaking) 40%, Cult Lore (Lhankor Mhy) 65%, Customs (Sartar)
60%, Dodge 30%, Elder Race Lore (as appropriate) 50%, Evaluate
50%, Homeland Lore (Sartar) 85%, Insight (humans) 40%,
Library Use 60%, Listen 45%, Lore (Cartography) 45%, Meditate
55%, Scan 45%, Worship (Lhankor Mhy) 55%.
Languages: Speak Heortling 75%, Speak New Pelorian 55%, Speak
Tradetalk 55%, Read/Write New Pelorian 50%, Read/Write
Theyalan 90%, Read/Write Tradetalk 60%.
Ransom: 1,000 L

55

RuneQuest

Typical Jonstown Thief

Typical Lunar Resident of Jonstown

There are a great many types of thief in Jonstown, from thuggish
street robbers, daring sneak-thieves, common cutpurses, and
even swindlers or grifters. This particular thief is a member of
the Night Stalkers (see page 32), as are many within the city,
and worships the god Eurmal, divine trickster and deceiver.

For many years the Lunar denizens in Jonstown coexisted
peaceably with the Sartarite townsfolk, though their presence
was never particularly welcome. Some remained fully Lunar
Tarshite, while others sought to adopt Sartarite ways and
customs, bridging both worlds. Some Sartarites converted to
Lunar ways. This was swept away with the rebellion against
the Lunar Empire, and neighbors became enemies. City Rex
Holdfast has promised peace to all within the city, but the
Lunars are nonetheless keeping as low a profile as possible.

Typical Jonstown Thief
Member of the Night Stalkers, Initiate of Eurmal

STR
10

CON
17

SIZ
11

Weapon
Dagger, Throwing
Shortsword
Small Shield
Spirit Combat

%
70
70
55
50

DEX
17

INT
14

POW CHA
16
14

Attacks
Damage
1D4
1D6+1
1D3
1D6+1

SR
S/MR
6
6
12

Pts
6
12
8
—

Hit Locations

Attributes

Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

Quality
Value
Hit Points
17
Move
8
Strike Rank 3 (DEX 1 SIZ 2)
Rune Points
3
Magic Points
16

D20 AP/HP
01–04
0/6
05–08
0/6
09–11
2/6
12
2/7
13–15
1/5
16–18
1/5
19–20
1/6

Runes: Darkness 40%, Disorder 80%, Illusion 60%, Man 60%,
Water 65%.
Cults: Eurmal
Rune Spells: Dismiss Magic 1+, Divination 1+, Extension 1+, Find
Enemy (1), Heal Wound (1), Lie (2), Multispell 1+, Reflection 1+,
Spirit Block 1+, Warding 1+.
Spirit Magic: Befuddle (2), Demoralize (2), Forget (3), Heal 2,
Mobility (1), Shimmer 2, Silence (1).
Passions: Devotion (Eurmal) 60%, Loyalty (Night Stalkers) 85%.
Reputation: 2%
Armor: Heavy leather hauberk, leather vambraces, leather hood
Skills: Climb 60%, Conceal 30%, Devise 35%, Disguise 35%,
Dodge 55%, Fast Talk 50%, Hide 65%, Homeland Lore (Sartar)
35%, Jump 70%, Listen 40%, Meditate 15%, Move Quietly 65%,
Scan 35%, Search 35%, Sleight 35%, Survival 60%, Worship
(Eurmal) 20%.
Languages: Speak Heortling 55%, Speak Thieves’ Argot 45%, Speak
Tradetalk 30%.
Ransom: None

56

Typical Lunar R esident of Jonstown
Initiate of Seven Mothers

STR
10

CON
13

SIZ
13

DEX
13

INT
13

POW CHA
13
12

Attacks
Weapon
Dagger
Kopis
Medium Shield
Spirit Combat

%
45
50
45
50

Damage
1D4+2
1D8+1
1D4
1D6+1

SR
8
6
7
12

Pts
6
12
12
—

Hit Locations

Attributes

Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

Quality
Value
Hit Points
14
Move
8
Strike Rank 4 (DEX 2 SIZ 2)
Rune Points
2
Magic Points
13

D20 AP/HP
01–04
0/5
05–08
0/5
09–11
5/5
12
5/6
13–15
5/4
16–18
5/4
19–20
2/5

Runes: Fertility 50%, Fire/Sky 40%, Man 60%, Moon 65%.
Cults: Seven Mothers
Rune Spells: All common Rune spells, plus Dismiss Lune (1),
Regrow Limb (2).
Spirit Magic: Befuddle (2), Countermagic 3, Demoralize (2),
Glamour (2), Heal 3.
Passions: Devotion (Seven Mothers) 70%, Fear (anarchy) 75%, Fear
(reprisals) 60%, Loyalty (Red Emperor) 60%.
Reputation: 4%
Armor: Usually unarmored but if threatened they wear heavy scale
armor and a leather cap (–15% to Move Quietly).
Skills: Climb 45%, Cult Lore (Seven Mothers) 35%, Dodge
45%, Homeland Lore (Lunar Provinces) 50% (Lunar Tarshites
only), Homeland Lore (Sartar) 25% (or 50% for natives), Insight
(human) 35%, Jump 50%, Listen 35%, Meditate 25%, Orate 30%,
Search 35%, Sing 25%, Worship (Seven Mothers) 55%.
Languages: Speak Heortling 60%, Speak New Pelorian 70%, Speak
Tradetalk 30%, Read/Write New Pelorian 50%.
Ransom: 500 L

The City of Jonstown

Ou tside Jonstow n
The map (pages 58–59) depicts locations near Jonstown. Some
are well-known, others unexplored. Many are described in the
RuneQuest Gamemaster Screen Pack Adventures booklet.
Unnamed locations should be developed as desired.

Arfritha Vale
A lightly-wooded valley with stands of birch trees, named for
a local earth goddess.

Ambush Hill
A 150-meter-high (164 yards) hill, with an excellent view of the
surrounding area. Its summit is mostly bare but for a ruined
temple to Orlanth, abandoned since 1607.

Apple Lane
This quaint little hamlet was to be an important stop for travel
across Sartar. Alas, the waves of visitors never materialized. Now
it is a quiet and curiously overdeveloped roadside stop.
The RuneQuest Gamemaster Screen Pack describes
Apple Lane in detail and contains several adventures set there.

Birne’s Squeeze
A trade road between Apple Lane and Jonstown runs through
the Thunder Hills by way of this narrow, winding, and rocky
ravine. Frequent robberies here have made the phrase “Birne’s
Squeeze” a local euphemism for highway robbery.

The Black Altar
This black stone altar is held sacred by Darkness-aligned
creatures such as trolls.

Blue Fox

Chaos Ground
This tainted place at the edge of Stael’s Hills was created when
the Crimson Bat bled here in 1602. It is a place of power for
Chaos-worshiping cults, and Chaotic things haunt the area.

Cherry Ridge
These hills are famous for the jerret cherry, a large ruby fruit
with medicinal qualities. Chalana Arroy’s cult has cultivated
these groves since the time of Sartar.

Clay Man
This small Frithan Clan village is named for an ancient
terracotta statue found when it was settled, which serves as a
shrine to the clan’s ancestors.

The Creek
This tributary of The Creek-Stream River drains northern
Sartar. It rises high in the Indigo Mountains and joins her
father at the Upland Marsh. The Creek and its tributaries
are notorious for flooding in Sea Season. The Creek is called
Krikans in cult ceremonies of the river goddess.

Dangerford
This sprawling village alongside The Creek is an important
trade center on the road between Alda-Chur and Boldhome.
Since the liberation of Sartar, it is governed by the Cinsina Tribe.

Dangerford Fort
This guards the most important crossing point over The Creek.
Its strategic location means it has been the place of countless
battles. Arkat fought one of his great victories here and a large
mound north of the ford marks that historic battle. See the
adventure The Battle at Dangerford (Book 3: SoloQuest).

The main settlement of the Blue Fox Clan of the Malani Tribe.

Dog-Rat Valley

Boranini River

This valley is between the Quivin Mountains and the
Brambleberry Hills and is named after the dog-sized rat-like
creatures found there.

This tributary of the Lorthing is sometimes called the Arfritha.
Killing or eating turtles is taboo for the local residents, who
always leave Boranini an offering of the first fish of the season.

Boulder Ruins
These ruins atop Stael’s Hills were once a complex of temples
but are now little more than foundations and walls made of
huge polygonal stones. Here the Varmandi found the goddess
who now resides in the fine Orleving temple at Greenstone.

Brambleberry Hills

Dolutha
This village is the oldest settlement of the Dolutha Clan of the
Cinsina Tribe, although most of that clan resides in Dangerford.

Dragonewt Road
Strangely carved plinths marking a magic road used by
dragonewts to move rapidly across vast distances, phasing in
and out of the Middle World. It is wise to avoid them, lest one
be caught up in these roads, never able to return.

The hills of this ridge are thick and wild with large, vicious
thickets of thorny blackberries.

57

RuneQuest

Drum Top

Gejay Hills

This hill was the drum of the giant Lant Ulfar. Locals can gain
special drumming magic by drumming upon it and offering
sacrifices to its spirit.

Also called the Oakland Back, these hills separate the Colymar
from the Malani Tribe. They are a mix of oak woodland and
grassland, populated with herders and bandits.

Dwarf Cliff

Geo’s Ridge Inn

The cliffs beneath the Drum Top are sheer and smooth. A dwarf
colony is said to be hidden there, sealed behind a magical door.
Dwarfs were often seen here, but not since Prince Saronil’s reign.

Elendra’s Graze

The first of many inns founded by Geo, the Ridge Inn sits on a
high cliff between Kagradus Peak and Thorgeir Ridge, at 1,600
meters elevation, but is open year-round. Because of the winter
cold and snow, Geo’s Ridge Inn was built deep into the solid
rock, with room for travelers and their animals.

This lightly wooded vale is home to a nymph, an ancestress of
the local Barlamani Clan of the Culbrea Tribe.

Geo’s River Inn

Elk

Next to a ferry crossing, this caravanserai is protected by the
dragonewts, who do not attack caravans that take this route.

The main settlement of the Elk Clan of the Culbrea. The
villagers are gifted farmers and healers, strong in Earth magic.

Goodhaven

Elkenvale

This village between Jonstown and Boldhome is the main
settlement of the Goodhaven Clan of the Cinsina Tribe. A
regular stopping point for caravans to or from Boldhome.

A beautiful valley where elk roam free from hunting, treated
as kin by the local clan, who claim descent from the nymph
who lives there.

Famous Bell
The main settlement of the Namolding Clan of the Malani
tribe, named for the great bronze bell found when the area
was first settled. The ‘Famous Bell’ still hangs in the village
watchtower. In times of alarm, it rings out and resounds
throughout the Arfritha Vale.

Farfield
A small Antoring Clan village in the Dog-Rat Valley. host to
the New Stone Tavern, a well-made way-stop for travelers.

Fordstone

Greenhaft
The main settlement of the Greenhaft Clan of the Cinsina Tribe.
The village once was part of the Culbrea Tribe but was granted
by the Lunar Empire to the Cinsina after Starbrow’s Rebellion.

Horse Rest
A walled village, home of the Jotoring Clan of the Culbrea Tribe.

Horse Town
A fenced pasture northwest of Runegate. A wooden palisade
defends it from bandits and things from the Upland Marsh.
Horses are sold by local breeders during the small weekly
market in Runegate or at the annual fair each Fire Season.

Larnste’s Table

The main settlement of the Blueberry Clan of the Cinsina Tribe.
The village once was part of the Culbrea Tribe but was granted
by the Lunar Empire to the Cinsina after Starbrow’s Rebellion.

A plateau sacred to Orlanth Adventurous where the Sartarites
were defeated by Fazzur Wideread.

Fox Hollow

Lorthing River

This walled village is the tribal center of the Culbrea Tribe and
the residence of their king.

Frithan

A short tributary of The Creek, prone to flash floods. A flash
flood in 1613 created by Orlanthi priests wiped out a Lunar
force sent to desecrate the Hill of Orlanth Victorious, starting
Starbrow’s Rebellion.

This walled village along the Boranini River is the main
settlement of the Frithan Clan of the Cinsina Tribe.

Lorthing Vale
Formed by the upper Lorthing River, it is the heart of the
Culbrea Tribe. Steep hills and mountains surround it on three

60

The City of Jonstown
sides, and the valley floor is meadows and grassland fringed by
pine forests. Much of it is under cultivation by local farmers.

Mernyr’s Landing
A small farm community tends this abandoned estate and lands.
See A Rough Landing in Book 4: Adventures (pages 5–23).

Old Grave

Solfint River
This tributary of The Creek rises in the Indigo Mountains, and
runs through the Hidden Valley and the Woods of the Dead.

Stael’s Hills
This range of hills overlooks The Creek and separates the
Colymar from the Malani Tribe.

An old grave, notable enough to serve as a local landmark.

Sunshine Inn

Old Top

This caravanserai between Jonstown and Boldhome belongs
to the Goodhaven Clan of the Cinsina Tribe. It’s the last stop
before the Quivin Mountains, or the first leaving them.

This steep hill is sacred to Orlanth, its mostly treeless summit
covered with rock formations where sacrifices take place.

Old Vampire Cave

Swan

No one has any idea what dwells there now, if anything, but it
is a dark and evil place, best avoided.

The main settlement of the Hiording Clan of the Colymar.
The women of the clan receive a cloak of swan feathers at their
initiation and wear it whenever they are to be seen by outsiders.

Ormthane Vale

Trade Think Market

A rich valley dotted with ruins from the Empire of the Wyrms
Friends. Greenstone Earth Temple is the main Ernalda temple
for the Malani Tribe. The Orleving Clan drove the Varmandi
out of this valley and took possession of the Earth temple many
generations ago; the two clans still feud over the deed.

This is one of the few places where humans may trade with
dragonewts in safety. The Vanstach Clan of the Dinacoli claim
monopoly, and trade foodstuffs to the dragonewts, especially
black-eyed peas and beef from red cattle. The dragonewts do
not seem to care about the Vanstachi claims and trade with
any humans here.

Portage
This village is upstream from whitewater rapids that require
portage around them. The villagers can be hired to aid this,
and there is a lively market here with a minor temple to Issaries.

The Rainbow Mounds
The ancient and brilliantly colored Rainbow Mounds host an
incredible labyrinth of caverns and caves. Various beings have
occupied it over the years. See The Rainbow Mounds in Book
4: Adventures (pages 48–75) for more information.

Red Bird

Two-Fisted Inn
A rest stop for travelers between Jonstown and Alda-Chur.
Unlike Geo’s River Inn, the Two-Fisted Inn welcomes
foreigners, even Lunars.

Two-Pine Ridge
This rugged crest is covered with a pine woodland. The Jotoring
Clan of the Culbrea Tribe hunts and herds sheep here.

Two Ridge Fort

A walled village belonging to the Lysang Clan of the Malani
Tribe. A curse upon the clan bans all red birds from entering
the Arfritha Vale.

An ancient fortress atop a steep-ridged butte at the end of
the Gejay Hills, it includes farms and pastures. The political
and religious center of the Malani Tribe, with temples to
Orlanth and Humakt.

Red Cow

Under Willow

This hill fort is the political and religious center of the Cinsina
Tribe. It is the main settlement of the Red Cow Clan.

The main settlement of the Underwillow Clan. The Cinsina
and Malani Tribes have contended over this clan in the past;
it is currently part of the Cinsina Tribe.

Ridgetop
This Culbrea village is built on a steep hill above the Lorthing
Vale. It is the main settlement of the Mathiording Clan.

White Crow Inn
A rest stop for travelers between Jonstown and Alda-Chur.

61

